
 TIME, THE ARTS/CINEMA NOVEMBER 17, 1997 VOL. 150 NO. 21
            --------------------------------------------------

            THERE'S TUMULT IN TOON TOWN

            FOR 60 YEARS, THE ANIMATED FEATURE WAS A DISNEY MONOPOLY.
            NOW RIVAL STUDIOS ARE MUSCLING IN, LED BY FOX WITH A
            WINSOME ANASTASIA

            BY RICHARD CORLISS
            ------------------------------------------------------------

            It is a rite-of-passage saga fit for a cartoon classic.
            Plucky kids dream of breathless adventures in a rainbow
            kingdom. They will be animators, spin magical musical tales
            for children of all ages and make pots of money in video
            and burger tie-ins. But standing guard before the cartoon
            castle is the evil Cruella Di Sney. "The animated-feature
            franchise is mine, all mine!" she thunders. "Nobody does it
            better, and nobody better try."

            Will the daring insurgents storm the castle and free the
            people from the tyrant's cloying clutches? Or will they
            discover that, gee, the people really like Di Sney's style
            and don't care to be rescued?

            We'll find out next week, when Anastasia, the winsome,
            often winning debut film from Fox Animation Studios,
            arrives on screens nationwide. Directed by Disney renegades
            Don Bluth and Gary Goldman (An American Tail, The Land
            Before Time, All Dogs Go to Heaven), this fanciful story
            about the lost princess of the Romanovs has all the
            elements for a cartoon hit: a girl-becomes-a-woman plot; a
            chipper, Alan Menkenish score by Lynn Ahrens and Stephen
            Flaherty (Once on This Island, Ragtime); and a cute, chatty
            bat. Close your ears to the Fox fanfare in the opening
            moments, and you can mistake it for a Disney film. Which is
            exactly what Fox hopes parents will do.

            There's no mistaking Hollywood's sudden urge to outfox the
            mouse. Anastasia is the first in a salvo of all-animated
            features from three deep-pocketed Disney rivals: Fox,
            Warner Bros. and DreamWorks SKG. The next few years will
            see the biggest splurge of cartoon features ever. But after
            the exclamation point come the question marks. Are there
            ways to make popular animated films that don't slavishly
            follow the rules Walt and the boys made up in the 1930s?
            Are studios jumping on the toon trolley just as the form
            has shown signs of losing its commercial luster? "I'm a
            little uncertain," says Chuck Jones, who joined Warner's in
            1935 and today, at 85, is the greatest living animation
            director. "There are so many films in the works now that
            the market may soon be oversaturated."

            Anastasia, which cost about $53 million, is getting a blast
            of promotion equal to that given any Disney cartoon--and
            35% more marketing support than Fox lavished on last year's
            smash Independence Day. With such a price tag, a studio
            boss gets to hope out loud. "I'd like it to be, at a
            minimum, the most successful non-Disney animated film,"
            says Fox filmed-entertainment chief Bill Mechanic, probably
            alluding to the $90 million earned at the box office by
            Warner's 1996 Space Jam. "But I really hope it will compete
            with the best Disney pictures." Best as in biggest: The
            Lion King's $313 million.

            So do other studio heads, who can be stirred to animation
            animus when they shiver in the shadow of the cartoon
            colossus. "We're rooting for Anastasia," says Bob Daly,
            Warner Bros. and Warner Music Group chairman and co-CEO.
            "It would be great for the entire industry if a non-Disney
            animated film became a real hit."

            It would also exact a little revenge on Disney, which is
            countering Anastasia with a 17-day rerelease of its 1989
            hit The Little Mermaid as well as the kid-oriented Robin
            Williams comedy Flubber. "Disney is throwing the kitchen
            sink against Anastasia," says Daly. "They're doing
            everything to kill it. And I guess if you were in their
            shoes you'd do the same thing." One of the men in those
            shoes, Disney motion-pictures-group chairman Richard Cook,
            deems it business as usual. Disney has tried--and succeeded
            in--undercutting most of its rivals' big animated films.
            "Are we going to make it easy for them?" he asks. "No. Are
            we going to compete? You bet! And what will be, will be."

            Daly also sees a proprietary arrogance in Disney's
            chairman. "Michael Eisner never tried to warn us off, but
            obviously he tried to make our life miserable," Daly says.
            "He thinks animation is Disney's birthright and that nobody
            has the right to be in animation but them."

            Birthright? Well, yes. For 60 years, since its release of
            the cinema's first cartoon feature, Snow White and the
            Seven Dwarfs, Disney has been the brand name for animation.
            Its chief rivals in the '40s and '50s, Warner Bros. and
            MGM, which were besting Disney in the quality and appeal of
            their animated shorts, never produced a feature-length
            cartoon. Only in the mid-'80s, when the studio taken over
            by Eisner and Jeffrey Katzenberg had yet to hint at a
            renaissance, did Disney lose its animation pre-eminence. An
            American Tail, produced in 1986 by Steven Spielberg's
            Amblin Entertainment, took in $47 million at the North
            American box office, equal to the grosses of both the
            previous Disney effort, The Black Cauldron, and its
            follower, The Great Mouse Detective.

            Under Katzenberg, Disney animation flourished with a new
            visual and musical verve. Nearly every film, from Oliver &
            Company (1988) to The Lion King (1994), outgrossed its
            predecessor by 40% to 50%. The Lion King, which Daly calls
            "the Star Wars of animation," earned about the same in
            domestic theaters as Forrest Gump did the same year. But
            that's chump change for animation. Toss in the video
            market, the merchandise and CD sales, and The Lion King has
            so far generated an estimated $1 billion--in profits.

            Video is animation's private bank. Of the all-time leaders
            in video sales, the top three (The Lion King, Snow White,
            Aladdin) and 13 of the top 20 are Disney cartoons.
            "Disney's animated machine remains the most lucrative
            business in the filmed-entertainment mix," noted a Smith
            Barney report, Filmed Entertainment: It's a Small World,
            issued in July, "and virtually no live-action film can
            replicate the profit potential of this venue." The figures
            that movie moguls dream of have dollar signs in front, and
            Disney's were enough to goad any showman into finding his
            inner children's market. It was time for Disney rivals to
            wake up and smell the cash flow.

            Is animation a market that will always expand? Or was the
            Simba spectacular the apogee of a trend? Or a glorious
            fluke? Disney's last three fully animated films to hit
            theaters--Pocahontas, The Hunchback of Notre Dame and
            Hercules, all released after Katzenberg's rancorous
            departure from Disney and his start-up of DreamWorks--have
            earned together just a bit more than The Lion King.

            You needn't cry for Eisner. Hunchback, his personal
            favorite as a passionate work of cartoon artistry, added
            $500 million more to Disney's bottom line. But you are free
            to wonder whether studios without the mouse-ears logo can
            count on customers that even Disney is losing.

            DreamWorks is too committed to wonder, too busy to worry.
            Next November the company will release The Prince of Egypt,
            the Moses musical that DreamWorks insiders have drolly
            tagged The Zion King. To build early support for his chancy
            project, which has no merchandising tie-ins, Katzenberg has
            shown clips to religious leaders, from eminent rabbis to
            rabid Evangelicals like Jerry Falwell and Donald Wildmon.
            The real test, though, is to make The Prince of Egypt not
            like Sunday school but powerful and fun. "If you're a
            disbeliever," says a crew member, "you can see it as a
            fairy tale." DreamWorks then moves from the mountain to the
            anthill for a computerized comedy, Antz, with the voices of
            many Hollywood familiars (Woody, Meryl, Sharon, Sly).

            Warner, which saw the part-animated Michael Jordan jape
            Space Jam earn $350 million in world theatrical release and
            merchandising, is preparing a fully animated feature, The
            Quest for Camelot, an Arthurian romance about a girl's
            search for Excalibur. The film, with songs by hitmakers
            David Foster and Carole Bayer Sager (at home she is Mrs.
            Robert Daly), has had a troubled history: it lost its
            director and two lead animators, and its release was bumped
            from this holiday season to next May. The Warner team's
            next project: Iron Giant, from Ted Hughes' novel about a
            boy's friendship with a mysterious metal machine.

            Since 1990, Warner Bros. and Spielberg's Amblin have
            collaborated on the small-screen Tiny Toon Adventures. Ah,
            TV, where the real money is, and where Paramount went for
            its 1996 hit, Beavis and Butt-head Do America, which
            grossed (heh heh, he said "grossed") a robust $63 million.
            (Next up for Paramount: a Rugrats feature.) "A movie can't
            compare financially with a successful series like The
            Simpsons on TV," says Fox's Mechanic. Says Peter Chernin,
            president of Fox's parent News Corp.: "We should have done
            a Simpsons movie five years ago." Simpsons creator Matt
            Groening and his colleagues toyed with expanding a 1993
            episode, Kamp Krusty, before deciding no. "But," notes
            Chernin, "we also wanted to start a traditional cel
            animation division and thought Anastasia was a compelling
            property to begin with."

            Based on a true-life fable that was the source for Fox's
            1956 film with Ingrid Bergman and Yul Brynner, the new
            Anastasia leaps from factoid to fantasy and turns
            pre-Leninist Russia into a fairy-tale realm. "We lived in
            an enchanted world," says the Czar's mother Marie (voiced
            by Angela Lansbury) of a land that festered with hot heads
            and empty bellies. The film then pins the whole Revolution
            on the monk Rasputin (Christopher Lloyd). Furious at being
            ejected from the Czar's court, he vows revenge, unleashes
            the forces of revolt, dies and returns, madder than ever,
            to chase down Anya. "We invented a lot of Rasputin's
            story," acknowledges Mechanic. "But parents and teachers
            who have seen the film feel this is a piece of history kids
            don't really know about, and it gets them interested in
            it." Right--so they can learn that it's all lies.

            Well, Quasimodo wasn't alive at the end of Victor Hugo's
            Hunchback, and Pocahontas wasn't all that much of a babe,
            and DNA tests proved that the woman widely believed to be
            Anastasia was not. But animated movies aren't built for
            lectures; they are supposed to move, and move people.
            Anastasia comes close to doing that with its coming-of-age
            tale of the orphan who could be a princess.

            Ten years after the Rasputinolution, Anya (Meg Ryan) is 18
            and alone. She meets Dimitri (John Cusack), a onetime
            palace servant with a 10 million-ruble scheme: to take a
            suitable young woman to Paris, persuade Marie that the girl
            is Anastasia and pocket the reward money. The usual
            complications ensue--boy hates girl, boy loves girl, girl
            keeps tripping annoyingly over scarf, dead monk tries to
            kill girl--accompanied by lilting melodies.

            The extensive rotoscoping (using live-action scenes as the
            basis for the artists' sketches) lends a stiffness to some
            of the animation; kids may well complain, "Too many
            humans!" But there are lovely memory and nightmare scenes
            that help create a wistful, trystful, tristeful mood. These
            are lovers who, to win a heart, must renounce their dreams.
            If there are any lovelorn six-year-olds out there, this is
            the movie for them.

            There probably aren't, so what is Anastasia's target
            audience? "We wanted our story to appeal to adults," says
            Mechanic, "particularly women who are most likely to take
            their kids to the movies." To keep Bluth from wandering too
            far into his trademark whimsy, the Fox creative brass kept
            tight reins on script and character development. They also
            insisted that he and Goldman give up their old-fashioned
            Rostrum camera and use Silicon Graphics computers in the
            studio Fox built for them in Phoenix. Says Goldman: "They
            pulled Don and me into the 21st century, kicking and
            screaming."

            The storytelling technique, though, is pure 20th
            century--1937, to be exact, when a young woman, surrounded
            by funny dwarfs, faced up to an evil sorcerer, cheated
            death and found her royal destiny. Snow White was a family
            film, but so were most movies, and it was a musical when
            perhaps a third of all films had songs. Now there's only a
            niche family market and virtually no other films are
            musicals, but the format is unaltered. That was then, and
            this is then too.

            In the time of the niche market, it's both presumptuous and
            enthralling for animators to try making a movie that
            touches everyone. That is the glory and the limitation of
            the Disney-style cartoon. "I'd like animated features to
            venture into adult territory," says John Canemaker, a
            leading historian of the form. "Why not do an animated
            Sweeney Todd? Or head in a totally different direction?
            Very few animated features have tried something original
            and unique, often with mixed results: the 1954 version of
            Animal Farm, the Beatles' Yellow Submarine, the X-rated
            Fritz the Cat. But most studios will probably try emulating
            Disney's success."

            Even if Disney is able to crush the insurrection, the
            company has already paid--in the defection of some
            animators and in the hyped prices it paid to retain its top
            talent. About time too, since animation directors were the
            only industry auteurs denied the Hollywood grail of profit
            sharing. A few animators are millionaires now, and frantic
            studios are wooing youngsters right out of art school with
            investment-banker salaries. "It's sure a novelty to have
            rich animators," says Jones, with the rueful laugh of a
            '40s ballplayer discussing today's $7 million infielders.

            If the challenge to Disney is at all successful, it will at
            least mean a few more reliable multiplex babysitters a year
            for parents who fret about the lack of decent movies for
            their kids. It could mean more: a revitalizing of a
            beguiling film art that, for all the fine recent work from
            Disney, is in a state of genial stasis. But for that
            rainbow ending, animators will have to forget about beating
            Disney and start with an open mind, a sharp pencil and a
            blank sheet of paper. Is it too much to hope that someday
            the prince won't come or the princess won't go to Paris?

            --Reported by Jeffrey Ressner /Los Angeles

