TIME Domestic

August 22, 1994 Volume 144, No. 8

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Return to Contents page
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

COVER/SPORT

BUMMER OF '94 As owners and athletes argue about money, a bitter strike
interrupts what looked to be a season of shattered records. Fans wonder if
baseball will ever be played like it ought to be.

BY WALTER SHAPIRO Reported by John Dickerson/New York, Janet I-Chin
Tu/Washington and David S. Jackson/Oakland

If life were fair, if this were a just world, if the prayers of small boys (and
large men) were answered, baseball fans would have turned on the late sports
news last Friday night to hear something like this:

"Hey, guys and gals, this is Biff Bixley with the scores. Another great night
for baseball. Dingers were flying everywhere. Thirty-two home runs, including a
clout by Matt Williams of the Giants that looks like it went into orbit. Roll
that tape! Is this ball juiced or what? With 44 taters, the Mattmeister has now
moved ahead of Roger Maris' record pace. But the big news was in Cleveland,
where Albert Belle crushed two homers, including this titanic upper-deck shot,
to lead the Tribe to a 9-3 victory over the Brewers. For the first time since
1954, it's the - yes! - first-place Indians. Talk about a real-life Field of
Dreams. It don't get any better than this."

But such August fantasies were not to be, not in Cleveland, Ohio, nor anywhere
else in the green cathedrals of what Annie Savoy in Bull Durham called "the
Church of Baseball." The 1994 major league season may have ended for good late
Thursday night in Oakland, California, with the sadly appropriate third strike
as A's pinch hitter Ernie Young whiffed on a fast ball from strikeout king
Randy Johnson of the Seattle Mariners. With that final, futile swing, the
national pastime went down for the count as the more than 750 members of the
Major League Players Association began their long-dreaded strike, baseball's
eighth work stoppage since 1972. Never before have the games been halted this
late in the season. Never before have the October play-offs and the World
Series been in such dire jeopardy. Never before has the naked power struggle
between players and owners seemed so heedless and self-destructive.

And there is an unquantifiable loss. The pastoral joys of baseball, joys that
no other sport can match, have dissipated. That final prestrike game at Oakland
Coliseum last Thursday night can serve as a parable. A balmy summer night,
small children with oversize mitts dreaming of foul balls, peanuts, Cracker
Jack and the familiar Take Me Out to the Ball Game played during the
seventh-inning stretch. But then it came time for the refrain "It's one! two!
three strikes, you're out!" A chorus of boos rose from the stands.

Baseball teaches its disciples patience and resilience - how else to survive a
six-month season in which even great teams lose 60 games? But there were danger
signs amid the 26,808 fans in Oakland that this time around both the players
and the owners might be caught stealing the hearts of the faithful. Placards
told part of the story: OWNERS AND PLAYERS: WHEN IS ENOUGH ENOUGH? And WILL
PLAY FOR FOOD. But so did the number of black-and-silver N.F.L. Raider caps in
the crowd. "Do the players play because of a love of the game or because of
money?" asked 32-year-old Arthur Dover. "I think this strike shows the answer."
Then, by way of warning to the players, he pointed to his Raider headgear and
added, "We do have football coming up."

Ever since that mythic street urchin wailed, "Say it ain't so, Joe" to Shoeless
Joe Jackson after he confessed that he was involved in fixing the 1919 World
Series, generations of sad-eyed children have been forced to learn that
baseball can be a cruel business. So it was in Oakland with 14-year-old Jeremy
Musser and his brother Nick, 11. The moral for Nick is that "the players are
getting too greedy." Jeremy's allegiance to the game is in danger of fading.
"If I can't be a baseball fan," he said practically, "I'll probably switch to
golf." All over America, empty baseball diamonds bake with dust as the
Jeremy-and-Nick generation sinks putts, shoots hoops, kicks soccer balls or
just hangs out at the mall. Baseball is losing the young (the last time a World
Series game was played during daytime was 1987), and a lengthy strike will only
hasten the exodus.

The strike forced cancellation of 42 games scheduled for last Friday and the
weekend. But more than that, it broke the cherished bond that the game has with
its die-hard fans. Baseball, more than any other sport, depends on a complete
162-game season to maintain the continuity of its records. Not since the 1930s
had baseball witnessed such a fan-friendly display of power hitting as this
season. Conspiracy theorists mutter darkly about a livelier ball, while other
analysts point to depleted pitching staffs and new homer-haven ball parks.
Baseball's most hallowed record, Roger Maris' 61 homers in 1961, was in danger
of being eclipsed. Five marquee-idol sluggers (Matt Williams, Ken Griffey,
Frank Thomas, Barry Bonds and Albert Belle) were all on target to hit more than
50 home runs. Tony Gwynn - the last star left in San Diego as the cash-starved
Padres traded off their high-priced talent - was in sight of the holy grail of
a Ted Williams-style .400 batting average. How quickly a magical season was
transformed into a haunting gallery of might-have-beens.

The negotiations resumed on Friday, but only hard-core true believers (like
lifelong Indians fans) clung to the hope of an early settlement. True, both
sides did agree to meet separately with federal mediators, as they did during
the 50-day 1981 strike. An optimistic source who is in touch with both the
owners and the players' union painted an upbeat scenario of baseball returning
around Labor Day. "It'll take a week before both sides begin serious
bargaining," he theorized. "Another 10 days to hammer out an agreement. And
maybe four or five days for the players and teams to get ready to resume play."
But as in any work stoppage, timetables are all airy speculation. "What this
boils down to is a test of wills," says John Helyar, author of Lords of the
Realm, a recent book on the business of baseball. "And you're not going to find
out the other side's willpower until it's tested with a work stoppage."

The baseball strike should be viewed more as a civil war in a wealthy extended
family than an old-fashioned labor-management confrontation. The owners - who
include such tycoons as broadcaster Ted Turner (Atlanta Braves) and home-video
king Wayne Huizenga (Florida Marlins), along with such FORTUNE 500 businesses
as the Tribune Co. (Chicago Cubs) and Anheuser-Busch (St. Louis Cardinals) -
possess the most coveted playthings in America: major league sports franchises.
The players, backed by the most successful union in history, have grown rich
beyond the wildest dreams of Joe DiMaggio and Willie Mays. More than 100
players make over $3 million a season; the average salary is just over $1
million. During the past decade, baseball has grown from a sleepy $600 million
business to an industry worth almost $2 billion. The strike, at its core, is
over the simplest of economic issues: how to divide this growing pie. And while
economics is as riveting as a two-hour rain delay, it is central to the stalled
negotiations. The clash involves base self-interest and primal greed: the
owners want to put a cap on how much players can earn; the players want to
defend and expand the right to negotiate salaries they believe they deserve.

Even before the owners ousted Fay Vincent as baseball commissioner in September
1992, they had long been prepping for a beanball war with the players.
Milwaukee Brewers owner Bud Selig - who has turned the title "interim
commissioner" into a seemingly lifetime appointment - makes no secret of
keeping the commissioner's job vacant to prevent an outsider from trying to
impose labor peace. As their negotiator, the owners selected former New York
City transit czar and failed mayoral candidate Richard Ravitch (he received 2%
of the vote in the 1989 Democratic primary). The self-confident Ravitch
believed he could pull off a near impossible double play: sell the players on a
salary cap (thereby limiting their total income, as other professional sports
leagues do) and work out a mechanism for wealthy teams (the New York Yankees,
the world champion Toronto Blue Jays) to share more revenue with their
impoverished cousins (like the near bankrupt Pittsburgh Pirates and Selig's
Brewers).

As it turned out, Ravitch's ambitious double-play pivot did not exactly match
the grace of Cardinals shortstop Ozzie Smith. It took Ravitch 18 months to work
out a limited revenue-sharing formula. And even then the wealthier teams made
it contingent on the players' miraculously agreeing to a salary cap. And though
the baseball contract officially expired at the end of 1993, Ravitch didn't put
the owners' salary-cap proposal on the negotiating table until mid-June. This
complex plan would limit total player salaries to 50% of overall major league
revenues, although guaranteeing that overall salaries would not fall below
their current level. This would depress free-agent spending by wealthy clubs
and simultaneously force small-market teams to sign higher-priced talent. The
payoff to owners was clear: player salaries currently equal 58% of revenues and
are growing. Small wonder that the players' response, enunciated by union
negotiator Don Fehr, was in effect "Death before dishonor - a salary cap
never!" The union's own counterproposal was an unimaginative enhancement of the
status quo: increasing player bargaining rights across the board and upping the
minimum salary from $109,000 to more than $175,000.

Like the European powers in the fateful August days of 1914 leading up to World
War I, both owners and players became locked in unyielding stances that made
protracted trench warfare inevitable. The few bargaining sessions that were
held before the strike quickly degenerated into formulaic speeches and
sarcastic byplay, all accentuated by the growing animosity between the voluble,
chain-smoking Ravitch and the intense, almost humorless Fehr. "Did you see how
unpleasant he is?" Ravitch asked rhetorically about Fehr before a joint TV
appearance Friday. "It's never been like that in all the negotiations I've been
involved in." If the season were to end without a contract, the owners would
retain powerful weapons in their arsenal: the legal right under labor law to
impose their proposal for a salary cap and the ability to lock the players out
of 1995 spring training if they balked. So like characters in a Clifford Odets
play, the union believed their only recourse was to strike.

Aug. 12 - a date that should live in infamy as long as baseball is played - was
chosen as the strike date by a player vote to give the union maximum leverage.
As employees, the players had already received more than two-thirds of their
1994 salaries. But the owners earn almost all their national-TV revenues during
the September pennant races and the October postseason. (The broadcast rights
to the play-offs and the World Series alone were projected to bring in $180
million.) The owners had just launched their experimental Baseball Network on
ABC and NBC with the mid-July All-Star Game. Early TV ratings were higher than
expected. To hype fan interest, the owners had offended baseball purists by
adding a second tier of postseason play-offs complete with football-like
wild-card teams beginning this year. (The gimmick may have a fatal flaw: the
Texas Rangers would currently qualify for the play-offs even though 10 other
teams in the American League have better records.) The players, armed with a
strike fund of nearly $200 million in hoarded licensing revenue, appeared
united as they braced for a lengthy strike.

At the end of the Oakland game last Thursday, the mood in the A's locker room
was somber and determined. Relief pitcher John Briscoe, 26, making $114,000 in
his first full year in the majors, admitted that he feels for fans, but added,
"We got to do what's right. I don't think they really understand things." As
for baseball, Briscoe predicted, "The game will stay the same, no matter what.
It was here before we came, and it'll still be here after we're gone." The
final batter, rookie Ernie Young, with just 31 trips to the plate in the big
leagues, tried to display the composure of a veteran when he said, "Everybody
wants to see baseball. But this is part of life. Things don't always go the way
you'd like."

No, they certainly don't, as every rabid Rotisserie rooter, desperately craving
his breakfast box-score fix, can attest. What makes the present condition of
baseballus interruptus so galling is that the major leagues as a whole (unlike
several individual teams) are prospering. Before the strike, attendance was
running a little ahead of the record 70 million who went to games in 1993.
Following the opening of Baltimore's fabled Camden Yards in 1992, new
baseball-only parks - combining classic ballyard architecture with modern
amenities - have brought sellout crowds to the Cleveland Indians and Texas
Rangers.

Moreover, it is hard to lose money selling a baseball team, in part because
there are probably more major Van Gogh paintings floating around than available
big league franchises. The Orioles were auctioned off for a record $173 million
last year, an increase of more than $100 million from their purchase price in
1988. Even the hapless Seattle Mariners, who have had only two winning seasons
in their 17-year history, were successively sold for $13 million in 1981, $76
million in 1989 and $125 million in 1992. There are four or five serious
bidders for the hand-to-mouth Pittsburgh Pirates (asking price: $85 million), a
team that has reportedly lost $20 million in the past three years.

This is not to deny that the owners have valid fiscal complaints. Ravitch
argues, with justice, that owners have trouble predicting their player costs
from year to year. The prime culprit here is baseball's bizarre system of
salary arbitration, which is designed to protect players with three to six
years of major league service. (Veterans can negotiate their own contracts as
free agents, while young players must accept what their team pays them as long
as it meets the minimum salary.) A baseball arbitrator must choose between the
team's offer and the player's demand; he is not allowed to split the
difference. What this has meant in practice over the years is that each time a
spendthrift owner like George Steinbrenner of the New York Yankees pays a
no-hit, no-field free-agent shortstop $2.5 million, every journeyman infielder
can successfully argue for the same salary in arbitration. So the only way a
team in a small market - like the Padres in San Diego - can adhere to its de
facto salary cap is to trade off young players the moment they become eligible
for arbitration. (The San Diego payroll is currently a rock-bottom $14
million.)

Although Ravitch steadfastly denies it, many in baseball speculate that the
owners' negotiating goal is to eliminate the hated arbitration system rather
than to mandate a salary cap. (The union clings to the unrealistic stance that
all players with two years in the majors should qualify for arbitration.)

In the hours leading up to the player strike, several owners of wealthy teams
pointedly dissented from Ravitch's salary-cap proposal. "It's all dollars,
knowing what it's going to cost to play ball," said Jerry McMorris, who owns
the Colorado Rockies, a hugely popular expansion team. "I don't think that a
salary cap is necessary." Other mavericks included the ever surprising George
Steinbrenner and Peter Angelos, new owner of the Orioles. But an insider close
to the owners cautioned, "Nothing heavy is going on. I don't think people will
follow Steinbrenner or Angelos either." Still, Angelos deserves credit for
floating the sensible idea that the owners should voluntarily eliminate the
rationale for the union's strike by pledging two things: to impose no
unilateral salary cap, and not to lock the players out of next year's spring
training. He also proposed that prominent outside accountants examine the books
of all 28 teams to clarify how many are actually losing money. Team finances
are even more mysterious than the infield-fly rule. Selig initially claimed
that 19 teams were in the red, although he later revised the figure down to
roughly a dozen.

The internal politics of the owners gives new meaning to the term
Balkanization. As author John Helyar puts it, "You have 28 different owners and
28 different economic interests, and no matter how united they say they are,
they tend to split according to their economic interests." Clearly, some owners
(Steinbrenner, Angelos) want to settle fast. The problem is that the owners, at
Selig's behest, enacted a stop-me-before-I-buckle-again clause that requires 21
votes for an agreement after a player strike begins. Some theorize that Selig
might lead a kamikaze band of less profitable owners to block an agreement well
into next season. But the owners seem to make and break their own rules almost
at will, and it's possible they could finesse themselves around the 21-vote
requirement and induce the players to return to the business of playing ball
rather than strike under, say, an interim proposal like that suggested by
Angelos.

In the end, the players will probably prevail, because they are blessed with
the ultimate edge: the gift-from-the-gods talent to hit and throw a baseball
better than anyone else in the world. No one in his right mind would spend a
beautiful August Saturday in the bleachers at Wrigley Field cheering 27 men in
suits - plus the mercurial Marge Schott of the Cincinnati Reds - as they bicker
over revenue sharing. But put Ken Griffey or Barry Bonds or Frank Thomas in a
Motel Six parking lot in North Dakota with a bat and ball, and fans will flock.
Maybe Greg Maddux or Jimmy Key will show up to do the pitching. That's the
enduring glory of baseball - it has survived war, fixed games, the Depression,
racial segregation, beer commercials and artificial turf. A sign held aloft at
Yankee Stadium last week said it all: THE GAME IS PERFECT. IT'S THE PEOPLE WHO
SCREW IT UP. So even as sad-eyed fans brace for a season or two sabotaged by
strike, there is comfort to be found. After all, it's only 18 short months
until pitchers and catchers report for 1996 spring training. Sob!

(chart)NOT AVAILABLE CREDIT: NO CREDIT CAPTION: HOW MUCH IS THAT RBI IN
DOLLARS? BUDGET VS. PERFORMANCE

(chart)NOT AVAILABLE CREDIT: Source Forbes, Business Week, AP CAPTION: BIG
PAYOFFS COMPARED

(chart)NOT AVAILABLE CREDIT: Source: Sports Illustrated TIME Graphic by Joe
Lertola, Deborah Wells, Jonathan Abbey, Lamarr Tsfura CAPTION: WEALTHIEST
OWNERS

(chart)NOT AVAILABLE CREDIT: Source: Major League Baseball Players Assoc.
CAPTION: SOARING SUMS

(chart)NOT AVAILABLE CREDIT: Source: AP CAPTION: THE PAY PYRAMID

(chart)NOT AVAILABLE CREDIT: From a telephone poll of 600 adult Americans taken
for TIME/CNN on Aug. 4 by Yankelovich Partners Inc. Sampling error is plus or
minus 4% Not Sures omitted CAPTION: Who is more to blame in the current
dispute, baseball players or owners? Are major-league baseball players paid too
much? Are the profits the team owners make too high?

[Image]

Text Only

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

time-webmaster@www.timeinc.com

This document was last modified 12:46:03 EDT Fri 23 Jun 95.
