[The New York Times Business section]

          September 24, 1997

          Deadly Crashes Increase Between Cars, Light Trucks


          By KEITH BRADSHER

          [D]ETROIT -- Albert and Marianne Hassan were driving
             their Chrysler Concorde through Merrick, N.Y., last
          spring to pick up their 3-week-old son when a Chevrolet
          Suburban slammed into their car at an intersection. The
          Suburban's high front end pushed in the driver's side
          door, hitting Hassan in the chest. He died quickly of
          internal bleeding.

          The 5,000-pound sport utility vehicle shoved the
          3,300-pound car, a midsize family sedan, sideways for 50
          feet until the other side of the car was crushed against
          a tree, blinding and critically injuring Mrs. Hassan.
          The driver of the Suburban was not injured.

          Crashes like this one, in which the police accident
          investigator says the Suburban's weight and high front
          end worsened the injuries, are becoming more common. The
          number of collisions between a car and a light truck --
          a sport utility vehicle, pickup truck or mini-van -- has
          been rising steadily. While they still make up a
          minority of two-vehicle crashes, these accidents now
          account for the majority of deaths in such crashes, and
          80 percent of these deaths are in the cars.

          The problem has alarmed a few safety researchers and
          some insurers. "It's something we need to work on
          desperately quickly," said C. Adrian Hobbs, the
          secretary of a new, mostly European panel studying
          collisions between vehicles of different sizes. "If
          nothing's done, people are going to continue to be
          killed unnecessarily."

          Yet little has been done, either in Washington or
          Detroit:

          -- Seven years after the introduction of the Ford
          Explorer set off a surge in sales of sport utility
          vehicles, federal regulators have not performed a crash
          test to determine what happens when these vehicles and
          pickups of similar design hit a car. Such tests could be
          a first step toward requiring automakers to make light
          trucks less dangerous to other vehicles.

          -- Most of the federal money designated to study crashes
          between different sizes of vehicles has been spent
          instead on air-bag safety studies in each of the last
          two fiscal years. This was because of an outcry over
          reports that 82 children and short adults have been
          killed by the devices. Yet federal accident statistics
          show that collisions between light trucks and cars now
          kill that many people in cars each week.

          -- Automakers in the United States have paid little
          attention to the problem. Engineers at the automakers
          say they work mainly on protecting the occupants of the
          vehicles they design and have no formal procedures for
          calculating and reducing the risk to occupants of other
          vehicles.

          -- The automakers play down the risk to people in cars
          posed by much heavier pickups and sport utility
          vehicles. Yet in fighting federal regulations intended
          to make new cars more fuel efficient, they have warned
          against building lightweight cars because they would be
          much more dangerous in crashes with vehicles already on
          the road.

          -- American car makers have largely ignored how the
          design of a vehicle may affect other vehicles in a
          crash, contending that it is weight difference, and not
          design, that determines who lives and who dies in
          crashes. Yet research in Britain has found -- and the
          top safety official for the American auto manufacturers'
          trade group agrees -- that sport utility vehicles and
          pickups are particularly deadly when they hit a car in
          the side because they ride higher off the ground and are
          more likely to strike the occupant of the car in the
          head and chest.

          Crashes with light trucks, particularly pickups and
          sport utility vehicles, are especially deadly for people
          riding in the small, fuel-efficient cars that have been
          produced over the last quarter-century in an attempt to
          reduce gasoline consumption and pollution. And pickups
          and sport utility vehicles pose an even bigger threat
          for the extremely fuel-efficient, 2,000-pound family
          cars that automakers say they will build early in the
          next century.

          Highway safety groups have also largely ignored the
          issue, focusing on air bags, fuel-tank safety and other
          concerns. Indeed, safety experts and automakers in
          Europe, where there are many small cars, have been doing
          more about the dangers of light trucks than their
          American counterparts, even though sport utility
          vehicles and pickups are less common there.

          Germany's equivalent of the American Automobile
          Association performed a crash test in 1993 that involved
          a nearly head-on collision at 31 miles per hour between
          a 2,400-pound Volkswagen Golf and a 4,800-pound Nissan
          sport utility vehicle. The Nissan rode up over the
          Volkswagen's hood nearly to the base of the Golf's
          windshield; the crash dummy in the Golf suffered head
          injuries that measured 3,177 on a scale for which
          readings above 1,000 are considered fatal. Partly in
          response to that test, Mercedes-Benz has designed its
          new sport utility vehicle to reduce the damage to cars.

          But it is the Big Three American car makers -- General
          Motors, Ford and Chrysler -- that make 86 percent of the
          nation's light trucks and all of the biggest sport
          utility vehicles. These vehicles are their most
          profitable models; Ford earns as much as $14,000 on each
          of its biggest sport utility vehicles, the 5,200-pound
          Expedition and the similar 5,600-pound Lincoln
          Navigator. In fact, the Big Three earn their entire
          profit on light truck sales, barely breaking even on
          cars.

          Of course, sport utility vehicles and pickups do not
          cause accidents; people do, when they drink, speed or
          otherwise show poor judgment. Executives at Detroit
          automakers are quick to point this out. They also note
          that light trucks are a lot smaller than some other
          vehicles on the road, like tractor-trailers.

          "Even if you're driving a tank down the road, you could
          always get hit by a locomotive," said Robert Purcell,
          GM's director of advanced technology.

          The automakers contend buyers need vehicles that ride
          high so they can drive off paved roads. In fact, few
          buyers use light trucks this way. According to an
          internal memorandum, the Big Three found in a joint 1995
          study that only 13 percent of sport utility vehicles
          were driven off road, 18 percent of pickups and no
          mini-vans.

          Most of all, auto executives say they are simply
          building the vehicles that Americans want. And the sales
          figures bear them out. Nearly 7 million vehicles or 44
          percent of all autos sold last year -- were light
          trucks, compared with 16 percent in 1971. The
          fastest-growing sales are for the biggest light trucks;
          almost 3 million of those sold last year weighed more
          than 4,000 pounds. Sales of the biggest sport utility
          vehicles have quintupled in six years, while the overall
          auto market has grown only 23 percent.

          "It's a good formula for the customer, and that's what
          we're providing," said Alexander Trotman, Ford's
          chairman.

          Just as it is hard to prove that any one victim of lung
          cancer acquired it through smoking, it is hard to prove
          in any specific crash that the people in the car would
          have fared better if hit by another car instead of a
          light truck. And just as the main evidence for the harm
          of cigarettes lies in studies of thousands of smokers,
          the best evidence for the problems created by light
          trucks lies in statistics on thousands of crashes.

          More Americans (5,447 last year) now die in crashes
          involving a car and a light truck than in crashes
          involving two cars (4,193), according to federal
          statistics. This is the case even though there are twice
          as many cars as light trucks on the road and even though
          car-to-car collisions remain more common than
          car-to-light-truck collisions. And for every person who
          dies in a light truck that collides with a car, four
          people die in cars hit by light trucks.

          Pickups and sport utility vehicles are becoming a lot
          heavier, and potentially more deadly, as more buyers
          choose more powerful engines and amenities like
          air-conditioning and plusher interiors. The latest
          Suburbans, for example, are a half-ton heavier than the
          1985 model that hit the Hassan family's Concorde. The
          extra weight can make a bad crash worse.

          Take a collision between a 2,900-pound Honda Accord and
          a 6,000-pound Chevrolet Suburban. The Accord driver
          would be at least 13 times as likely to be killed as the
          Suburban driver, based on a formula calculated for
          crashes by Leonard Evans, a top safety researcher at GM.
          The formula was based on car-to-car crashes and may
          understate the danger of a crash with a light truck.

          One big insurer, the Progressive Corp. in Cleveland, has
          already raised liability premiums for sport utility
          vehicles and large pickup trucks after an analysis
          determined that medical bills for people hit by these
          vehicles were unusually high. Other insurers are
          considering similar moves.

          Police investigators who handle traffic accidents do not
          need such statistics to convince them of the dangers of
          light trucks. They say that many of the worst crashes
          they see these days, with deaths and especially serious
          injuries, occur in collisions between light trucks and
          cars.

          While mini-vans are classified by the government as
          light trucks, experts say they are less deadly because
          they tend to weigh less than other light trucks, ride
          closer to the ground and have frames that are less
          damaging in crashes. Indeed, even a mini-van can fare
          poorly in collisions with other light trucks. Cynthia S.
          Wellons of Hampton, Ga., was driving a 3,200-pound Dodge
          Caravan mini-van last June when the driver of a
          4,500-pound Chevrolet Blazer coming the opposite way had
          a coughing fit and, police say, crossed the center line.

          The Blazer, with its high bumper and frame, ran up on
          the mini-van's hood, crushing the engine, dashboard and
          steering wheel onto Ms. Wellons, who was wearing a seat
          belt but was killed. The Blazer's driver, Richard D.
          Thornton, suffered a bruised heart and lung and was
          released after a night in the hospital.

          "If I'd been in a smaller vehicle and they were in the
          same, they probably would be better, but I'd be dead,"
          Thornton said, adding that he hoped to buy another sport
          utility vehicle.

          In this crash and in the one that killed Hassan on Long
          Island, the victims might have died even if hit by a
          car. Both crashes may have involved some driver error.
          The driver of the Suburban who hit the Hassans, Anthony
          Montouri, has been charged with driving under the
          influence of alcohol; he has denied any wrongdoing.

          But in each case, accident investigators concluded that
          the accidents would have been less severe if only cars
          had been involved. The Suburban that hit the Hassans'
          Concorde was "up much higher than if it were a car, and
          that means more intrusion into the vehicle," said Gary
          T. Ferrucci, a Nassau County, N.Y., accident
          investigator.

          For two decades the government has tested cars for how
          well they protect occupants in crashes and then rated
          them according to the results. Reprinted by car-buying
          guides and cited in automotive advertising, these
          ratings influence the buying decisions of millions of
          Americans.

          But given the proliferation of sport utility vehicles
          and pickups, the crash test results seem increasingly
          irrelevant.

          The tests were created in the 1970s, when light trucks
          were mainly pickups for commercial and agricultural use
          and accounted for only a sixth of the automakers' sales,
          compared with nearly half now. The tests require family
          vehicles to protect occupants from death when crashed at
          30 mph into a concrete barrier. The government gives
          safety ratings of one to five stars based on separate
          concrete-barrier tests at 35 mph, supplemented more
          recently by side-impact tests that involve slamming a
          3,015-pound sled against the vehicle.

          But hurling a car into a concrete barrier is equivalent
          only to crashing it into another car of the same weight.
          Indeed, the government attaches a little-known footnote:
          The ratings are valid only for collisions with vehicles
          within 500 pounds of the same weight. So, while the
          2,300-pound Honda Civic won four stars for the safety of
          the driver and five stars for the safety of the front
          passenger, it is really no match for the 5,600-pound
          Lincoln Navigator, a sport utility vehicle that has the
          same ratings.

          Some safety experts think another caveat is needed: that
          the ratings may not hold true for collisions with higher
          vehicles that may override the bumpers and other
          protective features of a car. When a car runs into a
          concrete barrier, the impact always occurs precisely on
          the bumper, which tends to be in front of the vehicle's
          strongest parts. But while car bumpers are required to
          withstand impacts at a height of 16 to 20 inches off the
          ground, light truck bumpers are not regulated and often
          extend much higher.

          Installing four-wheel-drive -- twice as common now as a
          decade ago -- raises a vehicle's underbody by two or
          three more inches. While many manufacturers try to make
          sure that the bottom edge of their light truck bumpers
          extends below 20 inches, safety experts at insurers and
          elsewhere say this does not do much good.

          "If you get a frontal collision, the sport utility
          vehicle bumper will tend to go over the hood of the car.
          That's bad," said Charles R. Baker, a top Honda
          engineer.

          New research in Britain suggests that height differences
          could be particularly important when sport utility
          vehicles and pickups hit cars in the side. Side impacts
          account for nearly a third of all car-occupant deaths
          each year. Yet federal tests in the United States only
          measure a car or light truck's ability to withstand
          being hit in the side by the equivalent of a midsize
          sedan.

          The 3,015-pound sled used for the side-impact test has a
          bumper with a lower edge only 13 inches off the ground
          and a top edge 21 inches high. The lower edge of the
          test sled is designed to reflect the fact that most
          vehicles brake before hitting a car in the side, so
          their bumpers are a little lower than usual. But the low
          edge also means that the test sled hits not only the car
          door, which is relatively weak, but also the side of the
          car's underbody, its sturdiest part, typically 15 inches
          off the ground.

          Police calculate that the Suburban that hit the Hassans'
          Concorde passed entirely over the car's door sills, with
          the main blow to the Concorde coming 24 inches off the
          ground. Similarly, the Transport Research Laboratory, a
          safety research group recently sold by the British
          government, crashed a 3,800-pound Range Rover into the
          side of a 2,200-pound Ford Escort at 18 mph last year
          and found no contact with the sill at all.

          Barry Felrice, the top safety official at the American
          Automobile Manufacturers Association, acknowledges that
          because sport utility vehicles and pickups ride higher
          above the road than cars, their side-impact collisions
          with cars tend to be more severe. "You're likely to be
          hit in the parts of the body that are more prone to
          injury," he said, "like the chest or the head."

          Some recent government studies support the concerns
          about light trucks and the adequacy of the current crash
          tests. The policy planning staff at the National Highway
          Traffic Safety Administration, for instance, issued
          statistical studies this summer concluding that serious
          injuries could be reduced if light trucks weighed less.
          And two of the agency's senior researchers did a
          little-noticed study early last year in which they
          concluded that current crash tests are inadequate when
          the nation's vehicles are increasingly split between
          low-slung cars and high-riding light trucks.

          "The effect of this tremendous degree of fleet
          incompatibility is not measured directly by
          frontal-barrier crash tests and will be the focus of
          future research," concluded the study's authors, William
          T. Hollowell and Hampton C. Gabler.

          Largely missing from research on the dangers light
          trucks pose to cars are crash tests and studies by
          universities and private companies. With a staff of
          fewer than 700 people and a budget that has shrunk by 19
          percent since 1980 after inflation, the safety agency
          relies heavily on outsiders for statistical research and
          entirely on outside companies for crash tests. But the
          $800,000 annual budget for such outside work on crashes
          between cars and light trucks has been spent almost
          entirely on air-bag research for two years.

          This budget will be replenished on Oct. 1. It will pay
          for two to five crash tests this winter, provided the
          money is not transferred again to air-bag studies.

          Philip Recht, the deputy administrator of the safety
          agency, defended its spending decisions, saying that
          federal officials had given more attention to crashes
          between light trucks and cars over the last several
          years and would step up their research.

          Yet the tests tentatively planned for this winter will
          not provide the basis for any rule changes, said a
          federal official who insisted on anonymity, adding,
          "That's just enough to start providing more questions."

          Detroit has also paid little attention to the size
          mismatch among vehicles -- unless it served the
          automakers' purposes in resisting fuel-economy rules.

          In the late 1970s, the Ford Motor Co. developed a
          computer program to predict what would happen when a new
          car or light truck struck other vehicles. But when
          federal regulators chose to focus on air bags and other
          safety gear instead of demanding so-called compatible
          designs, Ford cut back its efforts. Other automakers
          never even started comparable efforts.

          Chris Magee, Ford's director of vehicle systems
          engineering, who worked on the program, said crash
          compatibility was not an active part of design. "We
          first of all worry in most cases about the occupants of
          the vehicle we're selling," he said. "As far as vehicle
          mix aspects, we might look at them, but there's not
          really any processes or procedures for doing anything."

          Some auto officials contend that the shift to light
          trucks might actually be saving lives over all. Indeed,
          heavier vehicles tend to protect occupants better than
          lighter vehicles not only when a driver crashes into
          another vehicle but also into a tree or some other
          object, they point out.

          Yet insurance industry crash statistics offer little
          support for this optimism. People in pickups and all but
          the largest sport utility vehicles actually are killed
          at a higher rate in single-vehicle accidents than people
          in cars. This is partly because these vehicles are more
          often driven by men, who have more accidents than women,
          but also because the vehicles' high centers of gravity
          make it easier to roll over than cars.

          As for whether the lower death rates in light trucks
          more than offset the higher death rates in cars, no one
          yet knows.

          Worried about a possible backlash from drivers of small
          cars, Mercedes-Benz has gone to great lengths to reduce
          the threat that its new 4,200-pound, $34,445 sport
          utility vehicle poses to cars. Below and behind the
          bumper is a hollow, horizontal tube that amounts to a
          second bumper at the same height as a car underbody. The
          tube and two hollow steel boxes behind it are designed
          to crush during crashes, absorbing energy that might
          otherwise be transmitted to either vehicle's occupants.
          Mercedes crashed the vehicle at 31 mph into a Mercedes
          so small it is not sold in the United States; a crash
          dummy in the car "survived."

          Officials at Volvo, long known for safe design,
          acknowledge that their cars are no match for a large
          sport utility vehicle. They are moving to install side
          air bags to provide more protection to the head and
          chest. Ford plans to announce a similar move soon. The
          only Big Three car with side air bags now is the
          Cadillac DeVille.

          The auto industry has split in recent months over
          whether the biggest sport utility vehicles and pickups
          should be made with frames that bend more on impact,
          absorbing energy in a crash. But less stiff frames could
          be less safe for the people in the trucks.

          The traffic safety agency has the authority to require
          crash tests in which the automaker must prove any new
          car or light truck does not inflict excessive damage on
          existing vehicles during collisions. If the agency did
          require such proof, automakers would have to choose
          among reducing the weight, height or stiffness of the
          deadliest models. But with research barely begun,
          regulators say they are not in a position even to draft
          such a rule.

          Some federal safety officials hope that Congress will
          allow the minimum standard for fuel economy in light
          trucks to be raised. Light trucks have ballooned in size
          and weight because each automaker needs only to sell
          light trucks with an average fuel economy of 20.7 miles
          a gallon, compared with the car target of 27.5 miles a
          gallon.

          Yet Congress, after lobbying from American automakers,
          has barred the traffic safety agency for the last two
          years from spending any money even to study whether
          fuel-economy standards should be raised.

          For now, the likelihood is that sport utility vehicles
          will become more popular, and car occupants will account
          for an ever more disproportionate share of fatalities.
          This bothers some safety experts.

          "If you can afford to buy this $36,000 sport utility
          vehicle, then you have a better chance of surviving than
          this poor guy down the street who can only afford to buy
          a car," said John Taylor, a professional accident
          investigator in White Haven, Pa.

          Yet after seeing too many car occupants killed or
          crippled by light trucks, even Taylor now drives a
          4,200-pound Ford Explorer. "Sport utility vehicles are
          great," he said, "for the guy that owns them."

                 Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
                   [The New York Times Business section]
