          NYTimes
          October 28, 1999

          Coke Tests Vending Unit That Can Hike Prices
          in Hot Weather

          By CONSTANCE L. HAYS

          [T] aking full advantage of the law of supply
              and demand, Coca-Cola Co. has quietly
          begun testing a vending machine that can
          automatically raise prices for its drinks in
          hot weather.

          "This technology is something the Coca-Cola
          Co. has been looking at for more than a
          year," said Rob Baskin, a company spokesman,
          adding that it had not yet been placed in any
          consumer market.

          The potential was heralded, though, by the
          company's chairman and chief executive in an
          interview earlier this month with a Brazilian
          newsmagazine. Chairman M. Douglas Ivester
          described how desire for a cold drink can
          increase during a sports championship final
          held in the summer heat. "So, it is fair that
          it should be more expensive," Ivester was
          quoted as saying in the magazine, Veja. "The
          machine will simply make this process
          automatic."

          The process appears to be done simply through
          a temperature sensor and a computer chip, not
          any breakthrough technology, though Coca-Cola
          refused to provide any details Wednesday.

          While the concept might seem unfair to a
          thirsty person, it essentially extends to
          another industry what has become the practice
          for airlines and other companies that sell
          products and services to consumers. The
          falling price of computer chips and the
          increasing ease of connecting to the Internet
          has made it practical for companies to pair
          daily and hourly fluctuations in demand with
          fluctuations in price -- even if the product
          is a can of soda that sells for just 75
          cents.

          The potential for other types of innovations
          is great. Other modifications under
          discussion at Coca-Cola, Baskin said, include
          adjusting prices based on demand at a
          specific machine. "What could you do to boost
          sales at off-hours?" he asked. "You might be
          able to lower the price. It might be
          discounted at a vending machine in a building
          during the evening or when there's less
          traffic."

          Vending machines have become an increasingly
          important source of profits for Coca-Cola and
          its archrival, Pepsico. Over the last three
          years, the soft-drink giants have watched
          their earnings erode as they waged a price
          war in supermarkets. Vending machines have
          remained largely untouched by the
          discounting. Now, Coca-Cola aims to tweak
          what has been a golden goose to extract even
          more profits.

          "There are a number of initiatives under way
          in Japan, the United States and in other
          parts of the world where the technology in
          vending is rapidly improving, not only from a
          temperature-scanning capability but also to
          understand when a machine is out of stock,"
          said Andrew Conway, a beverage analyst for
          Morgan Stanley. "The increase in the rate of
          technology breakthrough in vending is pretty
          dramatic."

          Bill Hurley, a spokesman for the National
          Automatic Merchandising Association in
          Washington, added: "You are only limited by
          your creativity, since electronic components
          are becoming more and more versatile."

          Machines are already in place that can accept
          credit cards and debit cards for payment. In
          Australia and in North Carolina, Coke
          bottlers use machines to relay, via wireless
          signal or telephone, information about which
          drinks are selling and at what rates in a
          particular location. The technology is known
          as intelligent vending, Baskin said, and the
          information gathered and relayed by Internet
          helps salespeople to figure out which drinks
          will sell best in which locations.

          "It all feeds into their strategy of
          micro-marketing and understanding the local
          consumer," Conway said. "If you can
          understand brand preferences by geography,
          that has implications for other places with
          similar geography."

          Coca-Cola and its bottlers have invested
          heavily in vending machines, refrigerated
          display cases, coolers and other equipment to
          sell their drinks cold. Over the last five
          years, Coca-Cola Enterprises, Coke's biggest
          bottler, has spent more than $1.8 billion on
          such equipment. In support, Coca-Cola has
          spent millions more on employees who monitor
          and service the equipment. In 1998 alone, it
          spent $324 million on such support to its
          biggest bottler.

          And last week, Coke's chief marketing officer
          unveiled the company's plan to pump more
          sales of its flagship soft drink, Coca-Cola
          Classic. The program includes a pronounced
          emphasis on Coke served cold.

          Sales of soft drinks from vending machines
          have risen steadily over the last few years,
          though most sales still take place in
          supermarkets. Last year, about 11.9 percent
          of soft-drink sales worldwide came from
          vending machines, said John Sicher, the
          editor of Beverage Digest, an industry
          newsletter. In the United States, about 1.2
          billion cases of soft drinks were sold
          through vending machines.

          In Japan, some vending machines already
          adjust their prices based on the temperature
          outside, using wireless modems, said Gad
          Elmoznino, director of the Trisignal division
          of Eicon Technology, a Montreal-based modem
          maker. "They are going to be using more and
          more communications in these machines to do
          interactive price setting," he said.

          Industry reactions to the heat-sensitive Coke
          machine ranged from enthusiastic to
          sanctimonious. "It's another reason to move
          to Sweden," one beverage industry executive
          sniffed. "What's next? A machine that X-rays
          people's pockets to find out how much change
          they have and raises the price accordingly?"

          Bill Pecoriello, a stock analyst with Sanford
          C. Bernstein, applauded the move to increase
          profits in the vending-machine business.
          "This is already the most profitable channel
          for the beverage companies, so any effort to
          get higher profits when demand is higher
          obviously can enhance the profitability of
          the system further," he said.

          He pointed to a possible downside as well.
          "You don't want to have a price war in this
          channel, where you have discounting over a
          holiday weekend, for example," he said. "Once
          the capability is out there to vary the
          pricing, you can take the price down."

          A Pepsi spokesman said no similar innovation
          was being tested at the No. 2 soft-drink
          company. "We believe that machines that raise
          prices in hot weather exploit consumers who
          live in warm climates," declared the
          spokesman, Jeff Brown. "At Pepsi, we are
          focused on innovations that make it easier
          for consumers to buy a soft drink, not
          harder."

