NYTimes
          October 23, 1999

          Selling Fashion Models' Eggs Online Raises
          Ethics Issues

          By CAREY GOLDBERG

          [C] AMBRIDGE, Mass. -- To the horror and
              disgust of mainstream infertility groups,
          a longtime fashion photographer has begun
          offering up models as egg donors to the
          highest bidders, auctioning their ova via the
          Internet to would-be parents willing to pay
          up to $150,000 in hopes of having a beautiful
          child.

          "It screams of unethical behavior," Sean
          Tipton, spokesman for the American Society of
          Reproductive Medicine, said of the Web site,
          www.ronsangels.com, which was already up on
          the Web on Friday and is to be officially
          premiered on Monday.

          Infertility specialists deplored the website
          as exactly the kind of "commodification" of
          human egg donation that they hope to avoid.
          Just this spring, signs of movement in that
          direction came when a couple advertised that
          they would pay $50,000 for an egg from a
          tall, athletic, top-college student with high
          Scholastic Aptitude Test scores.

          The photographer, Ron Harris, justifies the
          egg auction as a natural outgrowth of the
          urge humans have to mate with genetically
          superior people and produce babies with
          evolutionary advantages. Particularly, he
          says, in a society like this one whose
          "celebrity culture" worships beauty.

          "If you could increase the chance of
          reproducing beautiful children, and thus
          giving them an advantage in society, would
          you?" he asks on the site. In a telephone
          interview on Friday, he described the
          objections to egg auctions as politically
          correct. Since not all women are the same, he
          argued, what they are paid for their eggs
          "should be a price that floats based on
          perceived value."

          Harris' melding of          ------------------
          Darwin-based eugenics,      Related Article
          Playboy-style               Yale Gene Pool
          sensibilities and           Seen as Route to
          eBay-type commerce struck   Better Baby
          some longtime infertility   (January 10,
          specialists as the most     1999)
          worrying sign yet of where  ------------------
          the partly unregulated
          field of "assisted reproduction" may be
          going.

          "It's frightening and horrible," said Shelley
          Smith, director of the Egg Donor Program, a
          center in Los Angeles, "and the worst part
          for me is to think there might be something
          worse still beyond our imagination. It seems
          to escalate, and ever since the Internet, it
          seems to snowball more rapidly, this
          depersonalization of people and selling of
          eggs."

          She and others said that as far as they knew,
          Harris' site was legal. Federal law expressly
          forbids trafficking in human organs but not
          in sperm and eggs, they said. Research by
          Harris' lawyers reached the same conclusion.

          The site has already received a serious bid
          of $42,000 from a couple who found it through
          a search engine, said Harris, 66. The models
          receive the full bid price, and Rons Angels
          takes a commission of an additional 20
          percent.

          The bid price includes no medical costs, the
          site specifies, also saying that it takes on
          no medical functions. But it does list scores
          of specialists who might possibly be willing
          to perform the procedure once an agreement is
          reached. Confidentiality is strongly guarded
          in such cases and could make the ads the only
          visible sign of the activity. That is the
          case with the ad seeking a college student
          with the brokers declining to say what
          happened to protect confidentiality.

          Harris said the models could not be
          interviewed on Friday because of an exclusive
          agreement with another newspaper until the
          site is launched on Monday. But each of the
          eight displayed luminously on the Website
          offered their reasons in print for selling
          their eggs: They ranged from "to not be
          dependent on a man" to "to support her
          four-year-old son" to "I want to help
          others." Several were from other countries,
          and one said her goal was "to move to the
          USA."

          Harris is probably best known as the creator
          of Aerobicise, a best-selling 1980s exercise
          video featuring fit models in leotards, and
          "The 20 Minute Workout," a television show
          with similar appeal. He has been a fashion
          photographer for 40 years, he said, and has
          also done some television directing for
          Playboy.

          The use of donor eggs by infertile couples
          remains relatively uncommon. According to
          Resolve, the National Infertility
          Association, about 1,700 babies were born
          from procedures involving egg donation in
          1996. Those numbers have been growing only
          slightly since then, experts say.

          But the compensation for egg donors is a
          burning issue these days, one under
          discussion from the ethics panel of the
          American Society for Reproductive Medicine to
          the meeting here this week of Resolve, which
          brings together patients and practitioners to
          support and educate infertile people. Members
          of both bodies said they had recently
          discussed Harris' website, which has been
          posted in various evolving forms for about
          two months, as an example of the kind of
          thing that needs to be stopped.

          "Things like this need immediate attention --
          the thing is, where is the appropriate
          avenue?" asked Diane Aronson, the executive
          director of Resolve.

          It is routine for egg donation centers to
          offer would-be parents an extensive profile
          of the egg donor, including photographs and
          descriptions of their talents and
          personalities. Several post donor catalogues
          online, and West Coast centers report a
          surfeit of donors, though they say there is a
          shortage in the East, particularly in New
          York City.

          But mainstream infertility groups deem it
          acceptable only to choose an egg donor based
          on her traits and then compensate her --
          usually between $2,500 and $5,000 -- for her
          time, inconvenience and discomfort. (Donors
          receive hormone shots to hyper-stimulate
          their ovaries and have a dozen or so eggs
          removed with a needle.) The groups tend to
          frown on anything that seems like actually
          trying to buy extra-nice genes -- though the
          line does seem blurred.

          "Basically what it comes down to is we're
          selling human tissue and somewhere along the
          line we've got to bring ethics into it," said
          Karen Synesiou, director of Egg Donation, a
          private company in Beverly Hills. "I don't
          know where the line is because I want to
          balance the needs of the infertile community
          versus society at large, but I think a
          bidding game crosses the line."

          Harris responded that it was "very unfair to
          put a limit on a girl's ability to make
          money." And seeking to pay all women the
          same, he said, "is like saying all women are
          the same, which is not the case."

          While trafficking in eggs is not illegal, it
          is distasteful enough that eBay, the giant
          auction website, specifically bans offering
          eggs for sale, as well as the auctioning of
          sperm and other human body parts (though hair
          is allowed.)

          Ms. Synesiou and others pointed out that in
          addition to other concerns, mating with a
          model might bring tremendous disappointment
          to some couples if the genetic dice fell
          against them and their child turned out
          unattractive. Not to mention how hard it
          would be for the child who failed such
          expectations.

          "It's the same as couples who go to the
          genius sperm banks," she said. "How will the
          child feel when the child's no genius?"

          Nancy Etcoff, author of "Survival of the
          Prettiest: the Science of Beauty,"
          (Doubleday, 1999) also pointed out that
          acquired characteristics like dyed blond hair
          and lips made plump by collagen are not
          inherited.

          Parents' quest for beautiful genes resonates
          powerfully with a growing body of academic
          research into the possible evolutionary
          reasons why certain physical characteristics
          from hip-to-waist ratio to symmetrical faces
          are considered desirable and beautiful.

          Harris, Dr. Etcoff noted, seemed to "put his
          own spin" on such evolutionary research.

          Indeed, in an editorial on the site, he
          quotes a study that looked at personal ads to
          determine the "market value" of mate choice,
          and found that men wanted youth, beauty and
          social skills, while women who had those
          qualities demanded men who were rich,
          good-looking and young.

          "This," wrote Harris, "is Darwin's natural
          selection at its very best. The highest
          bidder gets youth and beauty."

          A bit later, he wrote: "It is not my
          intention to suggest we make a super society
          of only beautiful people. This site simply
          mirrors our current society, in that beauty
          always goes to the highest bidder."

          ----------------------------------------------
          Related Sites
          Following are links to the external Web sites
          mentioned in this article. These sites are
          not part of The New York Times on the Web,
          and The Times has no control over their
          content or availability. When you have
          finished visiting any of these sites, you
          will be able to return to this page by
          clicking on your Web browser's "Back" button
          or icon until this page reappears.

               Copyright 1999 The New York Times Company
