	  NYTimes, July 17, 2000

	  Utilities Trying New Approaches to Pricing Energy

	  By MATTHEW L. WALD

	  [W]ASHINGTON, July 16 -- As air-conditioners hum this summer, and
	  experts issue dire warnings about electricity running short,
	  a growing number of utilities are varying the price of power
	  based on supply and demand to make sure there is enough to go
	  around.

	  The approach is a decidedly novel one for electric utilities,
	  which have mostly set prices for power without regard to
	  fluctuations in energy use. And it is inducing companies and
	  individual consumers to change how they use power and think
	  harder about what electricity is worth to them at different
	  times.

	  Wisconsin Electric Power is one of the utilities with a new
	  approach to pricing power. The company usually has no trouble
	  meeting demand when temperatures rise in the summer. But
	  during the second week of May, usually the slack season for
	  power use, between the winter and summer peaks, the utility
	  had closed many generating stations for maintenance.

	  So when the temperature in Milwaukee hit an unseasonable 90
	  degrees, Wisconsin Electric saw a power shortage looming. One
	  possibility was buying electricity from another company on
	  the open market, but because other utilities were also caught
	  short, that would have cost 10 to 20 times the usual price.

	  Instead, the utility called one of its biggest customers, the
	  Cleveland Cliffs iron ore mine, in Michigan's Upper
	  Peninsula. How would the mine feel, dispatchers asked, about
	  taking the afternoon off -- and being paid for it?

	  At first the answer was no. But then plant managers looked at
	  the pile of crushed ore coming out of the milling machines,
	  and realized that if the machines shut down for the rest of
	  the day, no shipments would be delayed.  After some quick
	  negotiations, a deal was struck: Wisconsin Electric would pay
	  the mine $82,000 to shut down its ore crushers.

	  "That was a heck of a good deal," said Richard A. Abdoo, the
	  chairman, president and chief executive of Wisconsin
	  Electric. His company would be paying Cleveland Cliffs about
	  30 cents a kilowatt-hour not to use electricity, or about six
	  times what Wisconsin Electric charges industrial customers
	  for a kilowatt hour. But it was cheaper than buying power on
	  the open market.

	  Wisconsin has gotten more sophisticated since May, gathering
	  the beeper and fax numbers of 80 of its biggest customers. On
	  hot afternoons, it can alert them to log on to its Web page,
	  where it offers them cash -- the amount varies, much like the
	  price of a restaurant's lobster special -- to reduce
	  consumption at certain hours.

	  There are no statistics on the number of utilities using new
	  methods to manage energy demand, but more and more companies
	  seem to be doing it. In Connecticut, Northeast Utilities is
	  installing Internet-controlled thermostats in 50 houses,
	  which it can use to bump air-conditioner settings up by 4
	  degrees when it needs the power, in exchange for a $200
	  payment to each homeowner for the summer. And around the
	  country, utilities are installing radio-controlled switches
	  on central air-conditioners and swimming pool pumps to turn
	  them off at peak hours.

	  For years, electricity has been sold under a system that is
	  worthy of the old Soviet Union: a kilowatt-hour has a fixed
	  price, and you can have as much as you want until it runs
	  out; then there isn't any for anybody.

	  Allan Schurr, vice president of Silicon Energy, which writes
	  software for the Internet-controlled thermostats, compared
	  the traditional system to an airline that keeps a flock of
	  planes by the gate in case a crowd suddenly wants to fly
	  somewhere.  "We don't have a reservation system," he said.

	  Not troubling customers with the fluctuations of price worked
	  fairly well under the old regulated system. A kilowatt-hour,
	  which the utility typically sold for 8 to 10 cents, often
	  cost 2 cents but hardly ever more than 12. Now, electricity
	  is often bought and sold wholesale, with no regulation, and
	  the cost can temporarily soar to $6 a kilowatt-hour. No
	  utility can buy much at that price, resell it at 5 or 10
	  cents, and still make a profit. Some utilities can pass those
	  costs through and spread them among their customers, but
	  everyone's costs would be much lower if customers had a
	  choice to cut consumption when prices became exorbitant.

	  The new pricing structure, with rates varying by the hour,
	  will take some getting used to. "A lot of people are going to
	  say, I don't want to face this," said Eric Hirst, a
	  consultant on electric industry reorganization.  "But others
	  are going to say, I can make money by cutting consumption
	  here and increasing consumption there."

	  Pricing by the hour has no impact on energy efficiency -- the
	  amount of work done per kilowatt-hour -- but it does improve
	  reliability, he said, because it will minimize power
	  failures.

	  Some utilities are reluctant to let customers know they do
	  not have enough power on hand to handle every contingency,
	  preferring to sell as much power as possible and pass along
	  occasionally extraordinary prices.

	  "Frankly, there are not a lot of production operations that
	  keep a lot of inventory around these days," said William T.
	  McCormick Jr., chairman and chief executive of CMS Energy,
	  the parent of Consumers Power, of Michigan.

	  And customers can be reluctant.

	  "We don't like to take a plant up and down if we don't have
	  to," said David L. Gardner, a spokesman for Cleveland Cliffs.
	  But on that day in May, it worked out that a shutdown
	  entailed little waste of manpower. "It was a win-win
	  situation," he said.

	  Cleveland Cliffs is one of many Wisconsin Electric customers
	  on an "interruptible" contract, which allows the utility to
	  pull the plug in an emergency. But this was not an emergency,
	  just a time when the economics favored rewarding the mine to
	  shut down.

	  The utility has signed up 81 major customers this spring,
	  with a total demand of 40 megawatts (enough to power 1,000
	  homes), who are prepared to bid for power interruptions. It
	  hopes to sign up customers using an added 30 megawatts,
	  though it is not yet sure how much of that will be
	  volunteered when it needs relief. But the amount could be a
	  significant fraction of demand on a bad day. Last year, the
	  maximum amount of power required simultaneously by all its
	  customers reached 5,975 megawatts.

	  In a blunt, low-tech way, utilities have tried for years to
	  cut peaks in demand for power, which they call peak load.
	  Potomac Electric Power, which serves the District of Columbia
	  and some Maryland suburbs, has persuaded about a third of its
	  600,000 residential customers to join a "kilowatchers club."
	  In exchange for a monthly credit of $9 on their bill, the
	  utility has installed a second electric meter for their
	  air-conditioners. It can shut off the air-conditioners by
	  radio control for 13 minutes every half-hour. Some customers,
	  in exchange for a $22 monthly payment, have meters that can
	  shut off their air-conditioners altogether. Last year, demand
	  for Potomac Electric's power peaked at 5,927 megawatts, but
	  the kilowatchers can shave 271 megawatts if necessary.
	  Potomac Electric typically uses the radio control 5 to 10
	  days a year.

	  Northeast Utilities, in Connecticut, also reduces demand for
	  its electricity for air-conditioning, but in a more
	  sophisticated way.

	  At the end of June, David and Elizabeth Yu, of Unionville,
	  Conn., accepted a $50 payment from their utility, Northeast
	  Utilities, to let Northeast replace the thermostat that runs
	  their air-conditioner.

	  Central air-conditioners in houses like the Yus' -- a
	  16-year-old, four-bedroom Cape -- draw about 3 kilowatts;
	  raising the thermostat 4 degrees cuts the number of minutes
	  they run each hour by about 30 percent, said Michael W.
	  Townsley, a Northeast manager who oversees conservation. If
	  the family had the thermostat set at 74, for example, the
	  utility could reset it to 78.

	  Most of the year, the power saved costs only a few cents an
	  hour. But now that Northeast buys its electricity on the open
	  market at peak hours, the price can change fast.  Hence the
	  value of fiddling with the Yus' thermostat from a central
	  office.

	  "When supply and demand are very tight, you're going to see
	  tremendous swings," Mr. Townsley said. "In the morning the
	  price might be down around 2 cents, later, $1 a
	  kilowatt-hour.  What that says is, there are some potential
	  economic opportunities there."

	  Many companies are marketing radio-controlled switches that
	  will turn off an air-conditioner or a pool pump. But the
	  thermostat, developed with the Carrier Corporation, has a
	  more subtle impact on the household.

	  The Yus' new thermostat calls in four times a day for
	  instructions. If the family lets the utility control the
	  temperature, Northeast will pay them another $150 on Oct. 1.
	  But if Mrs. Yu finds the house uncomfortably warm, she can
	  override the setting. Each time she does so, though,
	  Northeast will deduct $15 from that bounty.

	  "The financial incentive is not that much," Mr. Yu said.
	  "It'll just get absorbed into the budget." But, being a
	  gadget-lover, he is attracted by the device itself.

	  Mr. Yu is at work during the hours that Northeast is most
	  likely to adjust their thermostat. But Mrs. Yu, who is at
	  home with the couple's three children, said, "It'll be
	  interesting to see how it changes our lives during the peak
	  hours."

	  Like all utilities, Northeast already has precise historical
	  data on how much power customers will demand at any given
	  level of temperature and humidity; now it wants to know what
	  that demand curve looks like when price is a factor.

	  "Our interest is primarily reliability, when supply and
	  demand tend to be outside of equilibrium," Mr. Townsley said.
	  "But that's also at the time when the economics come in."

