                The Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition -- November
                              25, 1997
     Rivalries Grow for Global Fishers,
               As Fleets Expand and Hauls Wane

     By JONATHAN FRIEDLAND
               Staff Reporter of THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

     USHUAIA, Argentina -- Odd Areld came to this town at the
     end of the world five years ago in search of fish.

     "At first it was El Dorado," says Mr. Areld, a lanky
     Norwegian whose body is flung over the captain's chair
     that commands the bridge of the Antarctica III. "But now
     there are no more fish."

     Stubbing out his Marlboro cigarette, Mr. Areld looks out
     at the nearly empty bay in front of the world's
     southernmost city. "There were 20 ships when I came
     here," he says. "None now, except us."

     Such is the state of the world's fisheries. The United
     Nations Food and Agriculture Organization says 11 of the
     world's 15 main fishing grounds are seriously depleted.
     Still, a big expansion of the global fishing fleet
     continues, with the Southeast Asian nations and China
     among the most aggressive.

               Growing Disputes

               Fishing conflicts are among the most visible of a new set
               of international security and diplomatic concerns caused
               by environmental degradation and resource depletion. Even
               the friendliest of allies, the U.S. and Canada, faced
               tensions earlier this year when talks broke down over
               salmon quotas. The U.N. says more than 100 countries are
               involved in fishing disputes, ranging from confrontations
               between the Philippine navy and Chinese fishermen to
               clashes between the Icelandic and Danish coast guards.

               Fishing rights "are going to be a big source of future
               conflict," says Ann Platt McGinn, a fisheries expert at
               the Worldwatch Institute, an environmental group based in
               Washington. "There are way too many boats and not enough
               fish to go around. The industry is totally out of line
               with what's economically feasible and biologically
               sustainable."

               The pressure on the resources of remote countries like
               Chile, Namibia and the Pacific Ocean island state of
               Vanuatu is intense and growing, magnified by unlicensed
               trawlers that illegally fish their waters.

               Stuck at the Dock

               Chile is clashing with American Seafoods Co., the biggest
               U.S. fishing company and the owner of the Antarctica III.
               The government has refused to license a $65 million
               factory trawler built by American Seafoods to operate in
               Chilean waters. The Seattle company's appeal to the
               Chilean Supreme Court to immediately overturn the
               government's decision was rejected earlier this month.
               American Seafoods plans to pursue its appeal in the lower
               courts.

               Chile's refusal to let the American Monarch into its
               waters "is both a strategic defeat for us and a symbolic
               one," says Michael Nordby, president of the company's
               South American operations. "We built a hell of a boat and
               now it is stuck fast to the dock."

               That is likely to happen more and more, and not just to
               American Seafoods. The company's majority owner, Kjell
               Inge Rokke, has moved to diversify as a hedge against
               scarcity. His flagship Oslo-based Resource Group
               International AS merged this year with Aker AS, a big
               Nordic oil-services and cement-manufacturing group, to
               create one of Norway's biggest listed companies, Aker RGI
               AS, with nearly $3 billion in annual sales. The handful
               of other major fishing companies have diversified into
               food distribution.

               Industry Transformation

               The recent history of American Seafoods says a great deal
               about the modern fishing business. The industry was
               transformed in the 1980s. Big Russian, Japanese and
               Polish fleets that roamed the globe in the previous two
               decades, fishing when and where they wished, gradually
               were locked out of the richest fishing grounds by the
               1982 Law of the Sea treaty, which extended
               internationally recognized territorial waters to 200
               miles offshore. The U.S. had started to protect its own
               200-mile swath in 1976, with congressional passage of the
               Magnuson Act.

               The gradual ouster of foreign ships from U.S. waters
               coincided with the arrival in Seattle of a handful of
               Norwegian banks flush with cash from the North Sea oil
               boom. Mr. Rokke convinced the bankers the time was ripe
               to buy used U.S.-registered boats, refit them with
               state-of-the-art equipment in Norway's shipyards to boost
               their fishing capacity and put them to work in Alaska. An
               added bonus: The refitting process would benefit from
               subsidies given by Norway to assist its hard-pressed
               shipyards.

               American Seafoods was the most aggressive of several
               companies pursuing similar strategies, using various
               foreign and U.S. shipyards. Dick Gutting, executive vice
               president of the National Fisheries Institute, a U.S.
               trade group, recalls what happened in 1989 when Congress
               approved a ban on the refitting of U.S.-registered ships
               abroad. "There was a stampede before the deadline to take
               advantage of the lower cost of foreign yards," Mr.
               Gutting says. "American Seafoods was at the front of the
               pack."

               In time, Mr. Rokke's boats commanded around 40% of the
               quota for Alaskan pollack, a whitefish widely used by
               restaurant chains in the U.S. But competition among
               factory trawlers has become so acute in Alaskan waters --
               despite the complex resource-management system
               established by the Magnuson Act -- that the annual
               pollack quota is taken in about 75 days. To assure a
               year-round supply of fish, Mr. Rokke began to look
               further afield.

               One place was Russia. American Seafoods began to fish
               Russian waters for pollack and cod in partnership with a
               Vladivostok company, using nine Spanish-built factory
               trawlers. Another place was Argentina, where American
               Seafoods dispatched five boats, including the Antarctica
               III.

               Juan Carlos Cardenas, the head of the Greenpeace
               environmental group's marine-ecology program in Santiago,
               Chile, has been tracking the growing presence of American
               Seafoods and its mainly Japanese and Spanish competitors
               in the southern oceans.

               "As the catch of pollack and cod fell, the search for
               substitutes grew," Mr. Cardenas says. First, he says, the
               companies concentrated on hake, whiting and golden eel.
               When yields declined and authorities slapped on tighter
               quotas to protect what was left, the companies switched
               to harder-to-catch fish like the Patagonian toothfish, a
               big whitefish that lives thousands of feet deep in
               oceanic trenches but commands a hefty $6,000 a ton.

               Scores of Spanish factory trawlers that had been paid
               subsidies by the European Union to stop operating in
               overfished local waters turned up in Argentina from 1992
               onward. Although a supposedly strict licensing system was
               in place, abuses became so common as competition
               intensified that by this past July authorities imposed a
               total fishing ban on the most popular species in a
               44,000-square-mile area to protect the meager remaining
               stocks. That is equivalent to the U.S. banning fishing
               for cod off New England.

               "We hit the red-alert stage just like Canada and the
               North Sea," says Hector Salamanco, Argentina's
               subsecretary of fisheries. He adds that it is difficult
               to establish a regulatory system that works, mainly
               because of limited enforcement resources.

               Fighting the Monarch

               Mr. Salamanco's Chilean counterpart, Juan Manuel Cruz,
               says he fears the same thing could happen to southern
               blue whiting and Patagonian grenadier if the American
               Monarch were licensed to fish his country's waters. These
               two species, which are used to make surimi, a fish paste
               favored by Japanese consumers, are harvested off Chile by
               one factory trawler, the Union Sur. "The resources here
               just aren't sufficient to handle a boat like the
               Monarch," Mr. Cruz says.

               The Monarch can stay at sea for months, processing as
               much as 700 tons a day of surimi, fish meal and fish oil.
               The quota established by Chile for the two species
               American Seafoods wants to harvest is less than one-third
               the amount of fish needed to fulfill the ship's capacity.

               Although Chilean coastal fishermen don't catch the two
               species, they have lobbied hard against the Monarch on
               the grounds it would devastate the food chain in their
               waters, a claim American Seafoods disputes. "Factory
               ships are already wiping us out," says Felix Gonzalez,
               president of the local fishermen's union in the central
               city of Puerto Montt. "The American Monarch would be the
               end of us."

               Mr. Nordby says American Seafoods is willing to let the
               government put a full-time observer on the Monarch to
               ensure it doesn't exceed its quota. He says the
               government is withholding a license for the Monarch in
               order to protect the Union Sur, which is owned by
               Japanese company Nippon Suisan KK in partnership with a
               Chilean businessman who is a prominent contributor to the
               ruling Christian Democratic Party. Mr. Cruz, the
               subsecretary of fisheries, denies that is the case.
               "There are no political elements here," he says.

               No 'Uncharted Horizons'

               Chile isn't the only place where American Seafoods and
               others face stricter limits. U.S. Sen. Ted Stevens, an
               Alaska Republican, has put a bill before Congress that
               would ban new factory trawlers in U.S. waters. Norway
               last year turned down a license application for a trawler
               less than one-third the size of the Monarch.

               "There are clearly limits to the future growth of the
               factory trawler fleet," says Walter Pereyra, chairman of
               Seattle vessel operator Arctic Storm Co. and vice
               chairman of the regional council that manages Alaskan
               waters. Mr. Pereyra says the best hope for big companies
               such as American Seafoods is more regulation, not less.
               "The days of being able to go from one resource to the
               next are gone," he says. "There aren't any uncharted
               horizons left."

               Knut Djuve, operations manager for American Seafoods in
               Argentina, agrees. He sees a clear message in diminishing
               catches and increasing conflicts between authorities and
               pirates. "It is just as important for us to have
               regulated fisheries as for the countries," he says. "You
               don't want to invest hundreds of millions of dollars just
               to fish out the waters in a couple of years."

                                 Return to top of page
                 Copyright © 1997 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights
                                       Reserved.
