The Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition

November 10, 1997

Manager's Journal
Why the Justice Dept. Is Wrong

By WILLIAM H. GATES

If you asked customers whom they would rather have
deciding what innovations go into their computer--the
government or software companies--the answer would be
clear. They'd want the decision left to the marketplace,
with competition driving improvements. This is the
question at the center of the Justice Department's
recent action aimed at forcing Microsoft to remove
Internet Explorer from Windows. In this instance, the
interests of the consumer seem to be less important than
the complaints of a handful of our competitors who want
the government to help them compete--by preventing
Microsoft from enhancing its products. The Justice
Department's position is akin to the government telling
personal computer manufacturers that they can't include
word processing, spreadsheet or e-mail capability in PCs
because it would be unfair to typewriter, calculator and
courier companies.

New Functionality

Microsoft and the Justice Department anticipated this
very issue three years ago when we signed a consent
decree that specifically allowed Microsoft to develop
"integrated software products." At the time, the
department was fully aware that we were planning to
integrate Internet capabilities into the forthcoming
Windows 95 operating system. Microsoft has a long
history of improving its operating system products and
building in new functionality, just as Apple, IBM, Sun,
Novell and others have. These features have included
such things as a graphical user interface, memory
management, type fonts, disk compression and networking.
Every one of these was available first as a separate
offering and later integrated to meet customer demand
for greater functionality in Windows.

Supporting Internet browsing in Windows is a logical,
incremental step in the evolution of the operating
system. For 15 years a core function of Microsoft
operating systems has been to enable consumers to locate
and use information from local sources, such as the hard
drive or the CD-ROM drive, as well as from remote
sources, such as local area networks. Windows 95 simply
permits users to get information from the newest remote
source--the Internet.

When a PC manufacturer like Compaq, Dell or Gateway
chooses to license Windows, it agrees to ship the whole
operating system, including Internet Explorer.
Installing Windows 95 does not prevent computer makers
from also shipping a competing browser, such as
Netscape's Navigator, and many of them do just that. PC
manufacturers are free to differentiate their products
from one another in many ways, including by adding their
choice of software products--but modifying Windows is
not one of them.

                        Internet Explorer is much more than just a "Web
                        browser." It provides important functionality that is
                        the basis for other companies' new software products.
                        Without a uniform Windows installation, end users could
                        not be sure of the performance of the integrated
                        operating system, and Microsoft could not stand behind
                        its product. Furthermore, Windows would become
                        Balkanized, like the many incompatible versions of UNIX.
                        This would eventually drive prices for PC products
                        higher as software developers and hardware manufacturers
                        would have to develop and test their products for all
                        the different versions of Windows. And innovation would
                        slow because developers would be reluctant to write new
                        programs if they couldn't be sure that new features
                        would work on all Windows PCs.

                        I doubt the New York Times would let a newsstand tear
                        out the business section of the paper just because it
                        wanted to sell more Wall Street Journals. Or that the
                        Ford Motor Co. would let its dealers replace a Ford
                        engine with a Toyota engine. Microsoft has the right to
                        preserve a consistent customer experience when using
                        Windows.

                        Curiously, while the Justice Department is claiming that
                        Windows should not include browsing capabilities,
                        Microsoft's competitors are busy incorporating basic
                        operating system services such as printing and running
                        applications into their browsers, making them nothing
                        less than . . . an operating system. If our competitors
                        can integrate an operating system into their browsers in
                        the name of competition, why should Microsoft be
                        forbidden to integrate browsing capabilities into its
                        operating system? Enhancing Windows to support Internet
                        standards more fully is not a frill--it is critical for
                        Windows to stay competitive. Telling Microsoft that we
                        can't improve Windows is telling us we can't compete.

                        Since its inception more than 20 year ago, the PC
                        industry has grown incredibly rapidly and provided real
                        benefits for customers without the government regulating
                        product designs. Creativity and entrepreneurship are
                        flourishing as hundreds of new software companies and
                        thousands of new products come to market each year.
                        Microsoft Windows has played an important role in this
                        innovation, largely because it serves as an open,
                        integrated platform for software developers, hardware
                        vendors and solution providers. This gives them the
                        incentive and the certainty they need to build products
                        for Windows, which attracts more customers and, in turn,
                        encourages greater demand, more innovation and new
                        products.

                        Consumers are the big winners. Today you can buy a PC
                        for under $1,000 that is more powerful than a PC that
                        just a few years ago was three or four times as
                        expensive. Prices for software are constantly falling,
                        thanks in part to the stable development platform
                        Windows provides. In the late 1980s, business
                        applications such as word processors or spreadsheets
                        typically cost several hundred dollars each. Now, you
                        can buy a full suite of far better applications for
                        about the same price. In 1990, CD-ROMs containing games,
                        encyclopedias and personal finance software cost $80 to
                        $200. Today, it's rare to see CD-ROMs for home users
                        priced above $49.

                        And although Windows is by far the most popular
                        operating system on the market today, the price has
                        remained virtually the same for years, while its
                        performance has leapt forward. Unlike other operating
                        systems, Windows will always be an open platform
                        available at a reasonable price, because that's the key
                        to attracting new software development and giving
                        customers the kind of low-cost, innovative PCs they want
                        and have come to expect. A high-volume, low-cost
                        approach works only as long as the platform remains
                        open, so we have a vested interest in keeping it that
                        way.

                        Rich Support

                        The Internet promotes openness and competition more than
                        almost any other invention of the past 100 years. The
                        government should encourage the rich support for
                        Internet standards that Microsoft is providing. The
                        popularity of Windows does not create a chokehold on the
                        Internet any more than a popular word processor chokes
                        off free speech. Windows PCs allow people to browse the
                        entire Internet easily. They allow anyone to become a
                        publisher and to offer goods and services to the global
                        market with minimal overhead and without anyone taking a
                        fee.

                        U.S. antitrust laws exist not to prop up competitors,
                        but to ensure that consumers benefit from the widespread
                        availability of goods and services at fair prices. And
                        that's exactly what we have today. Microsoft spends more
                        every year to improve the Windows operating system. This
                        year we will spend more than $1 billion on research and
                        development for future versions of Windows. Over the
                        next several decades we will enhance Windows so that
                        computers can talk, listen, see and learn, making it
                        dramatically easier to enjoy the benefits of the
                        Internet. The PC business has an exciting future--if the
                        government does not hold it back by regulating product
                        design.

                        --------------------------------------------------------

                        Mr. Gates is chairman and CEO of Microsoft.
                                                                        [Image]

                                         Return to top of page

                         Copyright © 1997 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights
                                               Reserved.
