[banner]
[toolbar]

          [Image]

          June 29-30, 1996                                              -----------------
                                                                         Gridlock on the
                                                                            Internet
          Explosive Growth Clogs
          The Internet's Backbone                                       Explosive Growth
                                                                         Clogs Internet
          By JAMIE MURPHY and CHARLIE HOFACKER                              Backbone

           [B]andwidth has become the Holy Grail of the Internet,        No Shortage of
              the unspoken contingency clause upon which virtually       Bottlenecks for
          all software developers and most content developers are       Internet Traffic
          mortgaging their future.
                                                                          Will Olympics
          Video conferencing? Videophones? Net phones? Movies on          Traffic Bring
          demand? Voice e-mail? Virtual Reality? Each of these           Down the Net?
          gizmos and many others already exist in some form, ready
          to run on both the server to which you're connected and
          the PC on your desk or lap.                                   -----------------

          But the pipes between your computer and whatever data         Related Articles
          you're trying to get from the Internet are invariably
          clogged. So while investors line up to wager millions of           Earlier
          dollars into the next exotic Internet technology, you            CyberTimes
          sit waiting on line like some high-tech peasant in a 10        Coverage of the
          kilometer bread queue.                                          Backbone and
                                                                            Internet
          How, you wonder, are we going to add all the wonders you          Resources
          keep hearing about -- the Java applets, the real-time
          video and audio, the Shockwave animation and sundry           -----------------
          other fancy technologies -- if we're already stalled in
          bumper-to- bumper traffic on the Information                      Graphics
          Superhighway?                                                  Traffic on the
                                                                            Internet:
          When will they widen the highway and raise the speed              A Graphic
          limit?                                                            Glossary

          There Is No "They"                                              Comparing the
                                                                        Size of the Pipe
           [T]he answer is that there is no answer because with
              the Internet there is no "they" -- at least not in
          the sense that humans are accustomed to organizing
          societies, governments and cultural institutions.

          Which is why more and more industry observers are
          voicing suspicions that the anarchy of the Internet may
          be its undoing.
          Nowhere is this more evident than in the development of       -----------------
          the Internet's so-called backbones, the super-high-speed      Backbone:[Image]
          pipelines in which all the packets of bits and bytes          The
          traveling between you and some remote server merge with       high-speed
          packets being exchanged by millions of other users, some      fiber-optic
          human, some robotic, all vying for a bigger, faster ride      cables which
          through the pipe.                                             shuttle
                                                                        information
          --------------------------                                    through the
          [Image] There is no                                           internet at 45
          economic model to support                                     million to 155
          the continued growth of                                       million bits per
          high-bandwidth use on the                                     second--more
          global computer network.[Image]                               than 10,000
                                                                        times faster
                                                                        than a 14.4
          Robert Raisch                                                 modem.
          --------------------------                                    -----------------

          But whereas you can petition government agencies or
          government-regulated utilities for a bigger sewer or
          water line or an expanded roadway, the owners and
          operators of the public portion of the Internet backbone
          are private businesses. And they are frankly perplexed
          about how they're going to make a return on the enormous
          investment it will take to widen the highway and unclog
          the pipes.

          In a recent interview, Robert Raisch, chief scientist of
          the Internet Company, a server host and developer,
          stated flatly, "There is no economic model to support
          the continued growth of high-bandwidth use on the global
          computer network."
          And that, says Hal Varian, dean of the School of
          Information Management and Systems at the University of
          California, Berkeley, is the problem with the Internet:
          The lack of an economic rationale for raising the
          Internet's speed limit is a major cause of its latency
          -- at times outright gridlock -- and a gaping pothole
          smack in the middle of the road to the network's future.

          Much of the Internet's backbone system consists of
          common information conduits, and the companies that
          manage them hesitate to spend money upgrading them,
          because the investment could benefit competitors who
          also make use of those conduits.

          One result of that reluctance is that the Internet is
          becoming, in Raisch's words, "a thirsty garden."

          "Huge portions of the garden will wither, blacken and
          die for want of moisture," Raisch predicted. "The
          weather is turning, and there is a major drought on the
          horizon. But is not for want of water itself. We simply
          can't afford the hoses."

          From NSFNET to Commercial Control

           [T]he backbones of today's Internet trace their history
              to the mid-1980s, when the National Science
          Foundation created the NSFNET. The idea was to make the
          foundation's five supercomputers available to scholars
          via the NSFNET information pipeline at the
          then-unbelievable speed of 56,000 bits per second.

          Yet increasing network traffic soon overwhelmed the
          servers and telephone lines of the NSFNET. So in 1987,
          International Business Machines Corporation and MCI, in
          partnership with Merit Network Inc., the State of
          Michigan's educational network, upgraded the network's
          backbone to a T1 speed -- 1.5 million bits per second.
          And in 1991, the foundation lifted the restrictions on
          the commercial use of the network and upgraded its
          backbone to a T3 speed, or 45 million bits per second.

          Other networks, including Advanced Network & Services
          Inc. and the very-high-speed Backbone Network Service,
          or vBNS, evolved to handle the increased demand on the
          Internet and to test new technologies.

          Advanced Network Services, originally a not-for-profit
          consortium of IBM, MCI, Northern Telecom and Merit,
          began in 1990 and was acquired by America Online in
          February 1995.

          vBNS, which is sponsored by the National Science
          Foundation, returns the NSFNET to the old days of a
          closed-access research system linking the same five
          supercomputers: the Pittsburgh and San Diego
          Supercomputing Centers, the Cornell Theory Center, the
          National Center for Supercomputer Applications in
          Urbana, Ill., and the National Center for Atmospheric
          Research in Colorado.

          Now the vBNS speed is OC-3, or 155 million bits per
          second, and it's projected to reach OC-12, 622 million
          bits per second, by early next year at the latest.

          MCI is the vBNS provider and one of the major Internet
          backbone providers, along with Advanced Network &
          Services, Sprint, and MFS Data Services/UUNET.

          In addition to the lines themselves, the backbone system      -----------------
          consists of huge hubs where all the intersecting              Hubs:
          high-speed lines merge to reroute billions of packets of      Metropoli[Image]
          data and send them on their way to their next stop --         Area
          either the Internet service provider from which they've       Exchanges
          been requested or, along a different line, to another         (MAEs) are
          hub for further routing.                                      maintained for a
                                                                        profit by
          There are two kinds of hubs -- Naps (for Network Access       companies like
          Points) and Maes (for Metropolitan Area Exchanges). The       MFS
          only significant difference between them is their             Communications.
          origins: Naps were officially chartered by the National       They sell
          Science Foundation when it turned the Internet over to        bandwidth to
          the public sector in 1995.                                    service
                                                                        providers.
          The Naps were assigned to Pacific Bell, Sprint,
          Ameritech and MFS Data Services/UUNET.                        Network  [Image]
                                                                        Access
          Maes, though not officially chartered, do the same work       Points
          as Naps. MFS Data Services/UUNET operates about a dozen       (NAPs) act as
          Maes and has announced plans to add more in the United        intersections,
          States, Germany and France.                                   like MAEs, but
                                                                        are chartered by
                                                                        the National
                                                                        Science
                                                                        Foundation.
                                                                        -----------------

          MCI is also investing heavily in public- and commercial-      -----------------
          access portions of the Internet backbone. It recently         Related Article:
          announced a joint venture with British Telecom that will      2 Phone Giants
          boost total Internet capacity by 30 percent. The              to Merge
          venture, dubbed Concert InternetPlus, will initially          High-Speed Data
          combine the two companies' existing backbone systems          Networks (June
          into eight new regional Internet superhubs, similar to        11)
          Naps or Maes, to avoid having to route most traffic           -----------------
          through the United States, said Allen Clark, a spokesman
          for MCI.

          "These will expand within the year to a total of 20 hubs
          in key locations around the world," Clark said.
          The free-market rules in the Telecommunications Act of        -----------------
          1996 will be the ultimate arbiter of the future shape of      Related Article:
          the Internet's backbones. For example, MFS Data               MFS
          Services/UUNET is now an Internet service provider, as        Communications
          well as the owner of both a Nap and is now an Internet        to Acquire
          Maes. Microsoft has a seat on its board.                      Internet Service
                                                                        Provider (May 1)
          Catch 22: Growing Bandwidth,                                  -----------------
          Explosive Demand

           [B]ut as fast as the backbone might appear to be
              expanding, it faces almost insatiable demand, as
          telephone companies, cable companies and Internet
          service providers all rush to offer higher bandwidth to
          their customers.
          And here lies the Catch-22 of bandwidth. The more users       -----------------
          venture beyond 28.8 Kbps modems into high-speed               Graphic:
          connections, the more crowded the backbone becomes. So        Comparing the
          increasing your access speed at home or at the office         Size of the Pipe
          contributes to the slowing down of the Internet as a          -----------------
          whole.

          --------------------------
          It all boils down to how
          much improvement is
          profitable.
          --------------------------

          For example, BellSouth, which has no investment in the
          Internet's backbone, is active in developing and
          implementing high-speed access schemes like Asymmetrical
          Digital Subscriber Lines (or ADSL, capable of receiving
          data at up to 7 megabits per second over existing copper
          phone lines), cable modems (capable of receiving 10
          megabits per second) and Asynchronous Transfer Mode
          (which guarantees needed bandwidth for streaming
          applications like real-time audio and video).

          "We are preparing to soon move our development work in
          ADSL from the lab stage to trial stage," said
          BellSouth's spokesman, Ted Creech. "We have also just
          introduced our cable modem-based trial of interactive
          and video services to some 8,000 customers in Chamblee,
          Ga., and our ISDN service has never been more popular."
          Some observers are skeptical of such claims on the part
          of the telephone companies because, they note, emerging
          Internet phone technologies could grab a big chunk of
          the phone companies' existing business.

          "All of the telcos have fiber optic lines they have no
          idea how to sell -- without cannibalizing their existing
          business," said Raisch.

          Even so, all the telephone companies are talking the
          talk. Morgan Littlewood, director of Internet services
          marketing for Cisco, a leading supplier of networking
          technologies, said of the phone companies, "If the
          applications are there, such as electronic commerce,
          they will be interested" in high bandwidth service.

          It all boils down to how much improvement is profitable.

          BellSouth's Creech said that providing high technology
          just for the sake of doing it wouldn't serve the
          company's customers or its stockholders in the long run.

          And Betty Jo Chang, director of technology programs for
          the Global Network Services Company of MFS Data
          Services/UUNET, observed, "A lot of telco folks got
          burned with video-on-demand games a couple years ago --
          just like some are going to get burned by the Internet
          toaster game now."

          UC-Berkeley's Varian agrees, adding that the Baby Bells
          are holding back on ISDN lines, for example, out of fear
          that they'll see their investment washed away by cable
          modems or some other developing technology. "They don't
          want to invest in an obsolete technology," Varian said.
          "And who can blame them?"

          Toward a New Billing Model?

           [H]owever things shake out on the client end of the
              Internet, MCI's Clark argues that free-market forces
          will ensure enough bandwidth at the backbone end to make
          the Internet viable.

          "With more companies investing in Internet technology,"
          he said, "market forces will drive the Internet industry
          to respond."

          But the market also requires profits throughout the
          system. While competition among Internet service
          providers has whittled the price point for unlimited
          consumer access to about $20 a month, many observers
          argue that if bandwidth is ever to increase, the billing
          model itself must change.
          There are now three basic billing models:                     -----------------
                                                                        Related Link
             * Flat rate, in which a user pays a certain fee for        The Berkeley
               unlimited access.                                        School of
                                                                        Information
             * Metered usage, in which the user pays by the amount      Management &
               of data sent or received.                                Systems web site
                                                                        includes a
             * Timed charges, in which the user pays by the minute      discussion of
               or other fraction of an hour.                            Usage-Based
                                                                        Pricing Schemes.
          There is a growing consensus that only metered billing        -----------------
          can provide enough profits for service providers and
          backbone administrators to expand their bandwidth. In
          other words, you're probably going to be paying a lot
          more in the future for fancy real-time audio and video
          on the Net than you'll be paying to send and receive
          your e-mail.
          Without metered pricing, the Internet service provider
          will suffer most, Raisch predicts. "They will need to
          raise prices to both consumer and server to support the
          required load," he said. "This is why I believe the
          mom-and-pop local ISP is doomed."

          The industry may already be realizing Raisch's
          prediction.

          Mae east, operated by MFS Data Services/UUNET, is seeing
          an increase in high speed, giga-switch, connections and
          a decrease in slower, ethernet connections, says Chang.
          That, she says, is "indicative of the slow but sure
          shakedown into large national ISPs and smaller regional
          ISPs."

          But some observers also see a silver lining in a metered
          plan set at a price point designed to guarantee plenty
          of bandwidth for multimedia applications.

          "If the Net is engineered to support real-time video,
          then everything else is essentially free," said Varian.
          "Just because you can reserve high-priority bandwidth
          doesn't mean that low-priority bandwidth can't remain
          very cheap.

          "My guess is that we'll see a mixture of flat rate and
          metered pricing. The flat rate network will work fine
          for e- mail and other slow traffic. Real-time
          communication will require metering."

          And when will this happen? That, Varian suggests,
          depends on how crowded the backbone gets in the near
          term.

          "We can probably live with a flat-rate network that
          looks like L.A. at rush hour," Varian said, "but not one
          that looks like Bangkok at rush hour."

                           -----------------------
          Jamie Murphy is a doctoral student in communication at
          Florida State University. Charlie Hofacker is a
          professor in FSU's Marketing Department. Brian Massey, a
          doctoral candidate in communication, contributed to this
          article.

              Home | Sections | Contents | Search | Forums | Help

                   Copyright 1996 The New York Times Company

           ----------------------------------------------------------
