                       December 3, 1997

                        Actress Julie Newmar and Others
                        Struggle With Noisy Leaf Blowers

                        By PETER GUMBEL
                        Staff Reporter of THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

                        LOS ANGELES -- To shut out the din of leaf blowers
                        around her Brentwood home, actress Julie Newmar first
                        tried playing Mozart and Handel at full volume. When
                        that didn't work, she started wearing
                        industrial-strength earmuffs. But they made it hard to
Asia                    answer the phone.
Europe
The Americas            So Ms. Newmar, best known as TV's first Catwoman, has
Economy                 gone on the attack.
Earnings Focus          "Ah, for the sound of rakes and brooms on a walk or
Politics & Policy       driveway," read antiblower leaflets she has plastered
Weather                 around the neighborhood. She has written to the mayor of
                        Los Angeles, threatening to move to New Zealand. And
                        after one neighbor refused to stop his Latino gardener
Editorial Page          from using a blower, she bought a can of black paint and
Leisure & Arts          sprayed the word "ruido" --Spanish for noise -- in big
Voices                  letters on the alley outside his house.

[Image]                 The neighbor promptly filed a vandalism complaint. "At
                        least I got their attention," Ms. Newmar says.
Table of Contents
                        Call to Arms

Related Sites:          Gas-powered blowers long ago replaced rakes and brooms
Barron's Online         in the well-groomed communities of Los Angeles. Over the
SmartMoney Interactive  past year, however, leaf blowers have become more than
Careers.wsj.com         just instruments to tend lawns and tidy flower beds:
                        They have become a call to arms, the latest symbol of
Business Directory      the city's divisions.
Publications Library
                        Opponents and proponents of the machines have sparred
Search/Archives:        for 11 years over outlawing or restricting them. Then,
Search                  last December, spurred by the complaints of unnerved
Briefing Books          residents like Ms. Newmar, the Los Angeles City Council
                        passed an ordinance banning the use of gas-powered leaf
Quotes                  blowers within 500 feet of residences.
Past Editions
Journal Links           Before you could say begonia, gardeners were marching on
Special Reports         City Hall. Tending the lawns of affluent Angelenos was
                        once the domain of Japanese-Americans. But it has
                        increasingly become an entry-level job for Latino
Resources:              immigrants, many of whom, it turns out, are a lot more
Help                    political. Banning leaf blowers, they contend, would
New Features            mean a return to backbreaking raking, which takes twice
Your Account            as long.
Contact Us
                        "They thought the gardeners would take this lying down,"
Glossary                says Adrian Alvarez, a leader of the newly formed
                        Association of Latin American Gardeners, which has
Advertising:            organized several demonstrations. "They were wrong."
Advertisers
E-Mart                  Nervous about stoking social tensions, the City Council
                        last summer delayed enforcement of the ban by six
                        months, until Jan. 1. With that deadline less than a
                        month away, the council could yet rip up the ordinance.
                        Even if it doesn't, police are openly saying that
                        enforcement will be a low priority.

                        Painful Memories

                        That is where Joan Graves and ZAP come in. Mrs. Graves,
                        a sprightly grandmother who is the wife of actor Peter
                        Graves, became an overnight activist back in 1985 when a
                        neighbor's gardener used a blower for what seemed to her
                        an eternity. She sits in her spacious living room in
                        Pacific Palisades, recalling how she ran screaming out
                        of the house to confront him. "It sent me right over the
                        edge," she says. "Thank God I didn't have a lethal
                        weapon in my hand."

                        From that encounter sprang a self-help group that
                        started meeting once a month at nearby Mort's Deli to
                        discuss traumatic blower experiences. Members include
                        Ms. Newmar and actress Meredith Baxter. Calling itself
                        ZAP, for "Zero Air Pollution," the group has set about
                        policing the ban itself. The first step: establishing a
                        telephone hot line to enable people to anonymously
                        report persistent blowers.

                        Names and addresses go into a database the group will
                        share with police. For the moment, offenders receive
                        warning letters. "Dear Neighbor," they begin, "Do you
                        know that you are committing a misdemeanor?"

                        It's an incendiary issue. A Catholic nun who belongs to
                        ZAP is at loggerheads with the priest of her church
                        because he isn't willing to enforce the ban. The weekly
                        Palisadian Post has been publishing a debate among
                        readers as to whether "leaf-blower tattletales" should
                        be compared to the Nazis.

                        Undeterred, half a dozen ZAP stalwarts gather one
                        Saturday morning to discuss the next step: citizen's
                        arrests. Jack Allen, a former city attorney in Beverly
                        Hills, is all in favor. So is Pepper Edmiston, a
                        black-haired mother of seven, who has arrived late. "I
                        screamed so much at the next-door neighbor's gardener
                        that I went hoarse," she tells the group. "I haven't
                        screamed at anyone so much since my first husband."

                        Mr. Allen outlines the procedure: Take a witness and a
                        cellular phone, confront the offending blower and then
                        call police. "They have to come if there's a citizen's
                        arrest," he says.

                        "How about calling the INS too?" shoots back Ms.
                        Edmiston.

                        "Oh gosh, this is becoming so confrontational," says
                        member Daphne Kurchak. Diane Wolfberg, who is hosting
                        this morning's gathering, concurs. "I'll do it if
                        someone is selling drugs on my street," she says. But
                        over a leaf blower? "People will get upset."

                        The person who gets most upset by such conversations is
                        Robin Pendergrast. An earnest man with thinning hair and
                        steel-rimmed glasses, he is the main lobbyist for the
                        nation's biggest manufacturer of leaf blowers, Echo Inc.
                        of Lake Zurich, Ill., a unit of Japan's Kioritz Corp.
                        These days, he's a busy man: More than 300
                        municipalities around the nation have banned or
                        restricted leaf blowers, or are thinking of doing so.
                        L.A. is a crucial beachhead.

                        In October, Echo filed suit against the City Council in
                        Los Angeles Superior Court, alleging that the ban
                        violates its constitutional rights and amounts to
                        flagrant discrimination. Why single out gas-powered
                        blowers, the suit demands to know. What about electric
                        ones, hedge cutters or lawn mowers, which can be even
                        noisier?

                        Echo doesn't actually like using the word noise. It
                        prefers "sound." And, it contends, critics don't know
                        about the new PB-46LN, aka the Quiet One. Listen to the
                        difference on a promotional tape. After the sound of
                        chirping birds comes a loud roar, followed by a lesser
                        roar. The Quiet One "is 50% quieter at full throttle,"
                        says a soothing female voice, offering "the peaceful
                        solution that communities like yours have been waiting
                        for."

                        Mr. Pendergrast is also busily building a pro-blower
                        coalition to make its concerns heard. On a recent
                        evening in Los Angeles, he is in the wood-paneled
                        11th-floor conference room of Pillsbury Madison & Sutro,
                        one of the city's top law firms, along with about 20
                        dealers and landscapers, who sit around in shirtsleeves.
                        At one shoulder of the U-shaped conference table sit
                        half a dozen gardeners, some in coats and ties.

                        Wary of Rhetoric

                        The meeting gets off to a sticky start. Before agreeing
                        to join a coalition, the gardeners want to clear up
                        matters such as procedure and voting rights. "We must
                        talk about the structure and dynamics of the group,"
                        says Mr. Alvarez, his dark hair swept back in a
                        ponytail. "To what degree are we a collective?"

                        Some of the other participants shift uneasily. The
                        language sounds suspiciously radical, Marxist even.
                        Landscape contractors, for one, "won't participate in
                        anything that is illegal, such as civil disobedience,"
                        says one of them, Larry Rohlefs. Others nod.

                        Mr. Pendergrast steers the conversation back to the goal
                        of overturning the ordinance. Soon, an executive
                        committee is elected, Mr. Alvarez is made president, and
                        the coalition is born.

                        As the four-hour session winds down at 10 p.m., Alvaro
                        Huerta, one of the gardeners' leaders, pauses wearily.
                        Gardeners usually only use blowers for 15 to 20 minutes
                        to clean the yard of an average house. Yet, he sighs,
                        "this has become a bigger issue than homelessness,
                        drive-by shootings or crack."

                                         Return to top of page

                         Copyright © 1997 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights
                                               Reserved.
