TIME International

August 12, 1996 Volume 148, No. 7

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Return to Contents page
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

GOOD GUYS GONE BAD?

A MEXICAN ANTINARCOTICS AGENT CLAIMS SENIOR GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS ARE INVOLVED
IN A CORRUPT SHAM

MICHAEL S. SERRILL

When Ricardo Cordero Ontiveros was forced to resign his job as head of an elite
Mexican anti-narcotics squad last November, he departed his Tijuana office in a
prudently unusual fashion. He secretly checked into a motel, and from there he
called the local army headquarters. He then traveled to the airport under close
military guard. "There were many people who wanted to kill me," he recalls. "I
needed a military escort."

Regrettably, his prospective assassins were not the druglords Cordero had spent
seven months chasing. Rather, he asserts, they were his own officers, angry at
their erstwhile boss for trying to expose pervasive corruption in Mexico's war
against drugs. Cordero says he has been in fear for his life ever since he
challenged the crooks hiding behind badges of authority. Partly to protect
himself, he has now gone public with tales of rogue police who routinely
ignore, protect and escort drug shipments and in some cases are in the
narcotics business themselves. "The Mexican antidrug effort is a fairy tale,"
Cordero said in an interview with TIME. "It's all a big show. Mexico is doing
nothing in the war on drugs."

The main target of Cordero's corruption charges, the national antidrug office
headed by Attorney General Antonio Lozano Garcia, denies the allegations and
challenges its former agent to produce evidence. Cordero says he has plenty of
proof, including stacks of documents hidden in a safe-deposit box.

Ricardo Cordero is an unlikely candidate for the role of whistle-blower. Owner
of a San Luis Potosi signmaking factory whose business slowed after the
December 1994 Mexican-peso crash, he used his connections in the National
Action Party (P.A.N.), a conservative opposition group, to win himself a job in
the agency headed by Lozano, a prominent member of the party. One of Lozano's
mandates from President Ernesto Zedillo was to clean up Mexico's notoriously
corrupt federal police force.

Though he had no police experience, in July 1995 Cordero was named head of the
intelligence division in the Tijuana office of the Attorney General's National
Institute to Combat Drugs (INCD). The main job of the 17-member task force was
to break up the Tijuana-based cartel run by the Arellano Felix brothers, among
Mexico's most dangerous narcotics traffickers. Instead of an elite force of
tough cops, however, Cordero found a group of officers who by his account spent
most of their time watching television and drinking beer. Their
headquarters--whose rent was paid by the U.S. Drug Enforcement
Administration--contained little equipment or furniture. Cordero says he ended
up paying for supplies out of his own pocket.

Sloth and lack of resources were the least of Cordero's problems. What most
shocked him was the level of covert collaboration between the drug dealers and
the police assigned to arrest them. "It was one surprise after another," says
Cordero. "You can't believe what goes on."

In one case, Cordero says, he was tipped off to a five-ton cache of cocaine
that was passing through the town of San Luis Rio Colorado in the state of
Sonora. When he and his men arrived to intercept the shipment, they found it
guarded by a squad of local and federal judicial police. He informed his
superiors, and was told to withdraw from the town.

In another instance, he learned of an operation in which police from the state
of Michoacan were using commercial air flights to ship drugs to agents in
Tijuana, who then presumably sent them north to the U.S. Last week President
Clinton's drug czar, Barry McCaffrey, and U.S. law-enforcement officials backed
up some of Cordero's charges, even as the Administration lauded Mexico's
overall cooperation in the drug war.

Cordero said his superiors in Lozano's office ignored his reports on police
corruption. Finally, after just seven months on the job, Cordero quit under
pressure. The ex-crime fighter says he went public with his charges only after
months of trying unsuccessfully to interest officials in Lozano's office and in
the P.A.N. In response, Lozano transferred the investigation to the federal
comptroller's office and at the same time issued a statement saying Cordero "is
obligated to prove his statements not only to the press but also before the
authorities."

Even as he endeavors to do so, Cordero finds himself in the dock. First came
whispers by P.A.N. activists that Cordero's charges were part of a larger
campaign to discredit the attorney general. Then there were leaks to the press
accusing Cordero of taking money from drug dealers. Finally last Thursday,
agents from Lozano's office arrested Cordero on bribery, narcotics-trafficking
and other charges. The attorney general's office says it is carrying out a
legitimate investigation. Cordero rejoins that his arrest is an effort to shut
him up.

--Reported by Paul Sherman/Mexico City

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Image]

Text Only
