                The Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition -- November
                                25, 1997
     Byzantine Method of Pricing Milk
     Won't Be Simplified Anytime Soon

         By SCOTT KILMAN
               Staff Reporter of THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

     Milk drinkers got some good news earlier this month, when
     a federal judge threw out one of the strangest federal
     regulations on the books. Known as the Eau Claire rule,
     it allowed dairy farmers to collect a bonus for their
     milk based on how far their cows were from the Wisconsin
     city.

     But consumers haven't won yet. Dairy farmers in about
     half the country are trying to outmaneuver the judge, and
     the U.S. Agriculture Department has requested a stay of
     the order while it appeals. "There will be chaos here if
     the judge's order stands," says Tom Thompson, a dairy
     farmer who is president of Georgia Milk Producers Inc.

    In most of the country, prices for milk have been more
    heavily regulated than those for any other U.S. farm
    product. (Some states, such as California, opted out of
    the federal price scheme years ago.)

    ----------------------------------------------------------

                                  The Eau Claire Rule

               The lowest price the Agriculture Department will allow
               processors in these cities to pay farmers for
               beverage-grade milk in December:

                City        Min. Price   City        Min. Price
                            Per Gallon               Per Gallon
                Eau Claire  $1.19        New York    $1.37
                Minneapolis   1.21       Charlotte     1.37
                Chicago       1.22       Atlanta       1.37
                Kansas City   1.27       Boston        1.38
                Denver        1.34       Tallahassee   1.41
                Dallas        1.37       Miami         1.46

               Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture

    ----------------------------------------------------------

               But a side effect has been the creation of an enormous
               bureaucracy. Administering the Eau Claire rule and other
               milk-price regulations takes a staff of about 500 at the
               Agriculture Department, almost as many people as the
               Office of Management and Budget uses to oversee all of
               federal spending. The rules cost consumers $1.7 billion
               some years, Agriculture Department studies show.

               Now, in the wake of U.S. District Judge David S. Doty's
               ruling, some state lobbyists and lawmakers are scrambling
               to save local dairy farmers by forming regional pacts
               that would essentially keep out cheaper milk from
               elsewhere and drive the retail price even higher than the
               federal rules did.

               "This is a nightmare," says John M. Schnittker, an
               economist at the Washington consumer advocacy group,
               Public Voice for Food & Health Policy. "Instead of our
               best chance at milk reform ever, we're getting cartels
               that will make things even worse."

               The establishment of federally regulated minimum prices
               dates back to the 1930s, when dairy farmers had little
               market power. Unlike corn farmers, who can store their
               products until prices rise, dairy farmers must sell their
               daily production whatever the price. So the government
               created a formula for determining a minimum price that
               processors had to pay dairy farmers.

               The Eau Claire bonus materialized in the 1960s when
               refrigerated trucks began making it possible to haul milk
               greater distances. Farmer-owned cooperatives in the upper
               Midwest thought the increase would make it more
               economical for them to ship their milk to regions
               suffering shortages. It became known as the Eau Claire
               rule because that city was in the heart of the Milk Belt.

               Instead, the rule made dairy farming economical in places
               far from the Milk Belt. As a result, Wisconsin, whose
               cool climate makes cows more efficient at producing milk
               than they are in many other areas, is no longer the
               biggest milking state. A group of upper Midwest dairy
               farmers filed the suit that led to Judge Doty's decision
               knocking out the Eau Claire rule.

               In fact, local dairies aren't necessary anymore.
               Megafarms are springing up in such places as New Mexico
               and Idaho that produce milk far more cheaply than the
               postcard-pretty Vermont dairy farm. In addition,
               processors are experimenting with filters to remove the
               water from milk, which makes shipping it cross-country
               cheaper.

               But even before Judge Doty made his ruling, one region of
               the country -- New England -- had moved to protect its
               dairy farmers from competitors elsewhere. Sen. Patrick
               Leahy (D., Vt.) helped tag onto the 1996 farm bill
               approval for a six-state New England milk-price compact.
               Because the compact essentially flouts the constitutional
               protection of interstate commerce, it required
               congressional approval. Called the Northeast Interstate
               Dairy Compact, it insures that cheap Midwest milk doesn't
               undercut local producers' prices by pricing all milk the
               same.

               Beginning in July, the commission set the minimum price
               to farmers for beverage-grade milk at $1.46 a gallon, a
               level that has been 5% to 22% higher than the federally
               mandated minimum price, which is recalculated monthly.

               For the average Vermont dairy farmer, the compact is
               putting about $1,000 more a month into the bank. New
               England shoppers, meanwhile, are paying collectively
               about $5 million more for milk monthly, Public Voice
               figures. Several supermarket chains raised their retail
               milk prices 20 cents a gallon over the summer.

               Now, state lawmakers and milk lobbyists elsewhere are
               rushing to follow New England's example. Arkansas,
               Louisiana and North Carolina have passed enabling
               legislation to form a Southeast compact, and similar
               bills are percolating in most of the rest of the Southern
               capitals. Farmers in New York, New Jersey and
               Pennsylvania are lobbying their state houses.

               But it seems that no amount of price regulation can save
               inefficient operations forever. The number of U.S.
               dairy-farm operators has dropped 44% over the past decade
               to 126,800. New technologies -- such as genetically
               engineered hormones that stimulate milk production -- are
               making cows far more productive. But U.S. milk
               consumption is stagnant -- one reason the industry
               launched its expensive milk-mustache ad campaign several
               years back.

               In any case, the next regional dairy compact presented
               for congressional approval will undergo more scrutiny.
               Some lawmakers are angry about the first one. "It's an
               abomination," says Rep. Bob Goodlatte, a Virginia
               Republican. "A lot of members didn't know what was going
               on."

                                 Return to top of page
                 Copyright © 1997 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights
                                       Reserved.
