   The Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition -- October 3,
                             1997

 Certificate Trading Program
 Reduces Acid Rain Emissions

 By JOHN J. FIALKA
 Staff Reporter of THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

 WASHINGTON -- As part of a sixth-grade science
 project, Rod Johnson's students in Glens Falls,
 N.Y., removed 330 tons of sulphur dioxide from the
 air.

 Holding raffles, bake sales and auctions over a
 three-year period, they raised $25,000 to buy 330
 certificates in the U.S. Environmental Protection
 Agency's acid-rain-emissions trading program -- one
 of the nation's hottest new commodity markets. Each
 certificate allows the owner to emit one ton of the
 noxious gas.

 Utilities trade the certificates -- some selling
 them for profit, others buying them to comply with
 air-quality standards. But the students at Glens
 Falls Middle School are going to sit on theirs. The
 way the EPA program works, that means the nation's
 air will be that much cleaner.

 Proposed by the Bush administration in 1990 as a
 novel, market-oriented solution to the problem of
 acid rain, the trading of what amounts to
 sulfur-dioxide-pollution permits has led to results
 that have exceeded expectations. Since its 1994
 inception, the trading program, administered by the
 EPA, has contributed to a 30% drop in
 sulfur-dioxide emissions from major polluters, the
 agency says.

 Cheap Alternative

 President Clinton hopes to sell a version of the
 trading program to other nations meeting in Kyoto,
 Japan, in December to conclude a treaty that curbs
 global warming. Though some environmentalists don't
 like this approach, and government agencies are
 finding it hard to explain the complex system to
 local citizens, business-people are warming to it.
 And Mr. Johnson says his students like trading
 because, "We can identify a problem and then
 participate in a solution."

 Trading appears to be a cheap way to help curb
 pollution. Industry had complained that removing
 sulfur dioxide from the air would cost as much as
 $1,500 a ton. But the price of about 7.2 million
 certificates being traded this year reflects a cost
 of $90 a ton. After years of hand-wringing, acid
 rain is being reduced by a market that lets
 individual companies make their own antipollution
 strategies.

 "This program turns companies into pollution
 minders," says Daniel J. Dudek, a senior economist
 for the Environmental Defense Fund in New York, who
 sold the idea to the Bush administration and has
 become a kind of Johnny Appleseed, spawning other
 trading plans. "When they [polluters] think about
 it, they say, "Hey! That's money going up the
 stacks." "

 Trading allows a company to hunt for the most
 cost-efficient ways to reduce emissions. In some
 programs it doesn't necessarily have to be their
 emissions. The Los Angeles area's South Coast Air
 Quality Management District, for example,
 established a program in which it gave four oil
 refineries credit in the form of certificates for
 removing the equivalent 2,000 tons of smog after
 they bought and junked 17,502 pre-1982 cars, which,
 the agency says, spewed an equivalent amount of
 pollution over the four-county district.

 But the program has been extremely difficult to
 sell to residents of Wilmington, an unincorporated
 area near Los Angeles Harbor where homes and
 schools sit next door to several refineries. The
 eyes of Elidia Madrigal, a teacher's aide in the
 local elementary school, widen as a concerned
 neighbor explains the program to her in Spanish:
 "If they take a couple of bags of garbage away from
 the street, it allows them to throw a couple of
 bags in front of your house," the neighbor says.

 Activists Sue

 "This is unfair! We're not going to tolerate this,"
 Ms. Madrigal says, complaining that the fumes from
 a refinery half a block away sometimes make her and
 her students sick. A local activist group,
 Communities for a Better Environment, is suing the
 refineries, the state and the Air Quality District
 in Federal District Court in Los Angeles, charging
 that the trading program violates the civil rights
 of residents of the predominantly Mexican-American
 neighborhood. They want to stop the trading program
 and get the government to set tighter emissions
 standards.

 But Paul Eisman, a senior vice president for
 Ultramar Diamond Shamrock Corp., which owns the
 nearby refinery, loves the program. By buying and
 junking 334 old cars, it was able to avoid
 installing more expensive vapor-control equipment.

 "This is a microcosm of a huge issue," says Mr.
 Eisman, who adds that trading allows companies to
 deal with pollution that otherwise would be too
 expensive to reduce. "The emission that's least
 costly to reduce gets reduced first," he says. But
 he adds that he understands Ms. Madrigal's concern:
 "If you're living next door to a situation like
 this, you're never going to be totally happy with
 it."

 Kevin Snape, director of the Clean Air Conservancy,
 a Cleveland-based environmental group that promotes
 trading solutions, says local "hot spots" will
 disappear as cheap certificates are bought up and
 companies discover it is less expensive to buy new
 antipollution equipment.

 In Ohio, he notes, utilities have found that
 byproducts of trading in the federal acid-rain
 program include cheaper and more effective
 scrubbers and new low-sulphur fuel-mixing
 techniques. "All of this would have never happened
 under the old regulatory model that said you must
 install this specific technology," he says.

 Basic Idea

 The basic idea for the sulfur-dioxide program is
 relatively simple. The government set a cap that
 reduced the number of tons of the pollutant it
 would allow in the air, starting in 1995 and
 declining thereafter. Then it issued to 110 of the
 nation's dirtiest power plants tradable
 certificates that matched their share of the cap.
 Companies that cut emissions below their cap had
 extra certificates to sell. Companies that didn't
 had to buy them from the cleaner companies.
 Companies can save certificates from year to year,
 but federal clean-air standards still limit the
 amount of pollution that can be released.

 For Milwaukee-based Wisconsin Electric Power Co., a
 unit of Wisconsin Energy Corp., the cap meant it
 had to cut sulfur-dioxide emissions from its five
 power plants by about 30,000 tons. Daniel L.
 Chartier, the company's emissions manager, figured
 he could remove 20,000 tons relatively cheaply by
 switching to low-sulphur coal. To get the remaining
 10,000 tons, he learned, would be tough. He would
 have to buy two house-size, $130 million machines
 called "scrubbers."

 But because other companies had reduced their
 emissions well below the cap, the market was
 flooded with cheap allowances. And since buyers can
 approach sellers in any part of the country, prices
 tend to even out. Mr. Chartier bought 10,000 of
 them, estimating he saved his company more than
 $100 million. This year he formed the Emissions
 Marketing Association and 63 companies, mostly
 large utilities, have joined it. "We found growing
 enthusiasm as the knowledge of emissions trading
 increased," he says.

 More markets are coming. Twelve northeastern states
 are adapting a version of the federal
 sulfur-dioxide trading program to reduce ozone
 levels, starting in 1999. Some of them have also
 joined a group of 37 states considering a larger
 smog-reduction plan. California has hatched a
 variety of such programs.

 Big Business

 While some may find it hard to envision pollution
 rights as a commodity, trading is already a big
 business. The EPA expects sulfur-dioxide trading to
 reach $648 million this year. The utility industry
 estimates actual volume is probably double that-or
 equal to the $1.2 billion cash market for U.S. soft
 red winter wheat. "Trades have basically doubled
 every year," says Brian McLean, head of EPA's
 acid-rain division, which tracks trades.

 The Environmental Defense Fund's Mr. Dudek says
 this is only the beginning. He is consulting with
 traders at British Petroleum Co., helping them
 determine how a world-wide market in
 carbon-dioxide-emission allowances would work.

 The Clinton administration has made trading a main
 part of its negotiating position on the treaty to
 prevent global warming. The treaty would impose a
 global limit on man-made sources of carbon dioxide,
 created by burning petroleum products, coal and
 natural gas. Since the 1850s, concentrations of
 carbon dioxide have increased in the atmosphere,
 and many scientists say that is artificially
 warming the Earth by trapping more of the sun's
 heat.

 Draft versions of the U.S. plan would give each
 industrial nation an "emissions budget" that would
 be its pro rata share of the global limit. (A
 program for developing nations would be negotiated
 at a later time.) Industrial nations that curb
 emissions below 1990 levels would have allowances
 to sell. Countries that can't curb it, or won't,
 must buy them.

 Adapting the U.S. acid-rain program to do that
 means stretching a trading program designed to
 cover hundreds of emitters to one that would cover
 millions and allowing international transactions.
 This will compound the complexity of trading, but
 Mr. Dudek insists it will also create many more
 cheap opportunities to reduce global carbon-dioxide
 levels.

 For example, a U.S. company could buy more
 efficient boilers or expensive antipollution
 equipment to meet its share of U.S.
 carbon-dioxide-emissions quota. Or, it could invest
 in more cost-effective clean-up projects in Russia.
 In a global program, Russia will have a great many
 allowances to sell because its industrial economy
 has collapsed since 1990, sharply cutting its
 emissions. And 1990 is expected to be the benchmark
 year for the treaty.

 Excess Certificates

 According to Australian analysts, the U.S., New
 Zealand, Japan, Norway and their country will have
 to buy emission allowances to meet their limits.
 European nations will, more or less, balance each
 other out. So the world's excess certificates would
 be held by Russia and the rest of the former Soviet
 empire.

 "We're talking about transfers of billions of
 dollars here," says Stephen Deady, commercial
 minister at Australia's embassy in Washington. "We
 think the whole question of emissions trading needs
 further work." European nations say they will
 consider trading plans, but only after the Clinton
 administration announces how much it will reduce
 U.S. emissions.

 Japan, anxious for meaningful results, has
 requested more details of the U.S. position. China,
 expected to be a major player in the Kyoto
 negotiations as a leader of developing nations, may
 be of two minds. Chinese diplomats reject
 carbon-dioxide controls as "ecocolonialism." But
 some officials see trading as an additional means
 of getting outside investors to clean up most of
 China's severe pollution problems in exchange for
 trading certificates.

 Despite the faint praise from its allies, U.S.
 officials remain bullish. Although the Russians
 haven't publicly stated their position, Energy
 Secretary Federico Pena says Russian officials are
 "very interested" in emissions trading. To sell
 certificates, he explains, Russia would first have
 to set up a rigorous monitoring system so the money
 from the sales could be focused on cleaning up the
 country's dirtiest factories or its enormous
 natural-gas-distribution system, which is believed
 to be leaking huge quantities of methane, a more
 potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide.

 Mr. Pena sees a situation in which "a U.S. company
 could go over, make a major investment to reduce
 the leakage and get credit for that. That would be
 a win for the local people, the government, the
 U.S. company and a win for global warming."

 But the idea baffles some groups. "When this gets
 to the real world, there's no way it can work,"
 says Daniel Becker, director of the Sierra Club's
 energy program. "You're going to let Russia be able
 to sell credit for plants that have already been
 closed so that General Motors can emit more
 pollution here?"

 'Win-Win' Deals

 The Clinton administration says trading also offers
 "win-win" deals for developing nations. The Energy
 Department has been helping Costa Rica develop a
 program based on reforestation. For outside
 investors, Costa Rica will agree to protect a
 portion of its rain forest that would otherwise be
 logged. Because standing forests remove carbon
 dioxide from the air, Costa Rica will then issue
 trading certificates.

 Richard L. Sandor, second vice chairman of the
 Chicago Board of Trade, has bought 1,000 of them,
 each permitting the owner to emit 1,000 tons of
 carbon dioxide. He hopes to sell them to U.S.
 companies in anticipation of a global-trading plan.
 "If Kyoto gives us a framework, that's all we
 need," says Mr. Sandor, who has been studying the
 possibility of carbon-dioxide trading for the Board
 of Trade. He says a world-wide market could
 generate $10 billion to $20 billion a year,
 rivaling the size of the U.S. soybean market.

 But Mr. Sandor will have a hard time selling any of
 this to Bill Hare, a physicist and global-warming
 expert for Greenpeace International in Amsterdam.
 Costa Rica's effort "worries the hell out of us,"
 Mr. Hare says. He explains that there is no
 international-accounting system to ensure that the
 trees will remain standing.

 Still, he says some kind of trading regime could
 come out of Kyoto, though it may take years to
 negotiate the complex rules. Swarms of investment
 bankers and venture capitalists are showing up at
 global-warming meetings, once ill-attended affairs
 dominated by a few scientists. "This is a very
 interesting development," he says.

 Meanwhile traders continue to push the envelope. As
 the result of a modernization program, New York
 state's Niagara Mohawk Power Corp. cut its
 carbon-dioxide emissions by 2.5 million tons. It
 traded emission rights for that amount to an
 Arizona utility for 20,000 tons of sulfur-dioxide
 allowances. Then Niagara donated the sulfur-dioxide
 allowances to local environmental groups, which are
 retiring them. And $125,000 of the tax benefits
 Niagara received from the deal are being used to
 convert a Mexican fishing village to nonpolluting
 solar power.

 Martin A. Smith, chief environmental scientist at
 Niagara, says the reductions and the experience in
 trading were worth it. "Do we just stand by and let
 these gases accumulate?"

               The Globe's Dirty Dozen

 Annual carbon-dioxide emissions

                    Total Tons Tons per
                    (millions) Capita
 U.S.               5,475      20.52
 China              3,196      2.68
 Russian Federation 1,820      12.26
 Japan              1,126      9.03
 India              910        0.90
 Germany            833        10.24
 U.K.               539        9.29
 Ukraine            437        8.48
 Canada             433        14.83
 Italy              411        7.19
 South Korea        370        8.33
 Mexico             359        3.93

 Source: Oak Ridge National Laboratory assessment of
 1995 data

                    Return to top of page
                            [Image]
     Copyright (c) 1997 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights
                          Reserved.
