
 The Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition -- September 23,
                             1997

 FTC Sharply Criticizes
 Proposed Tobacco Deal

 Agency Says Profits Would Exceed
 Penalties Included in Settlement

 By JOHN R. WILKE and JEFFREY TAYLOR
 Staff Reporters of THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

 WASHINGTON -- The Federal Trade Commission sharply
 criticized the proposed national tobacco
 settlement, concluding that cigarette makers could
 reap big profits that would far exceed the
 penalties the pact would impose.

 The FTC's reaction strengthens the hand of
 President Clinton and those on Capitol Hill who are
 demanding a tougher settlement. The original deal,
 struck between tobacco companies, state attorneys
 general and public-health advocates on June 20,
 calls for the industry to pay $368.5 billion over
 25 years to offset states' costs of caring for sick
 smokers.

                      "Cigarette prices are likely
                      to rise more than the amount
                      of the annual payments, and as
                      things now stand, vast
                      additional revenues will go to
                      the tobacco companies," FTC
                      Chairman Robert Pitofsky said
                      Monday. He found the proposed
                      deal's broad antitrust
                      exemption especially
                      troublesome, saying it would
                      give tobacco companies
                      immunity from price fixing and
                      let the largest grow stronger
                      while squeezing out smaller
                      players.

                      The FTC found that the plan
                      could boost industry profits
                      from $36 billion to as much as
 $123 billion over the life of the settlement,
 depending in part on whether industry tax
 exemptions are enacted.

 Rep. Waxman Sought Study

 "This study shows that the tobacco settlement is an
 even better deal for the industry than anyone had
 imagined," said Rep. Henry Waxman, a California
 Democrat who asked the FTC to study the proposed
 settlement. He said the antitrust exemption is
 among many provisions that will have to be changed
 as Congress drafts tobacco legislation.

 A tobacco-industry spokesman, Scott Williams,
 rejected the FTC's report, saying it is "highly
 speculative and misses the point, which is that the
 price increases in the settlement are designed to
 maximize the reduction in underage tobacco use." He
 said the report "is based on assumptions that are
 at best inaccurate," such as the FTC's calculation
 that cigarette makers routinely pass on more than
 100% of the cost of tax increases.

 The settlement calls for reductions in youth
 smoking of 30% in five years and 60% in 10 years.
 If the industry fails to meet the targets, the pact
 would impose penalties of as much as $2 billion a
 year, which would probably be passed along to
 customers in the form of further price increases.
 The payments would also be tax-deductible, and the
 industry could apply for refunds. President Clinton
 has said he wants to toughen these penalties. The
 pact also includes an exemption from antitrust laws
 that would allow cigarette companies to cooperate
 on raising prices.

 The FTC also said cigarette makers could end up
 paying significantly less than the $368.5 billion
 envisioned under the proposed settlement because
 the payments are linked in part to annual sales,
 which are expected to decline as consumer prices
 rise. Richard Lugar, the Indiana Republican who is
 chairman of the Senate Agriculture Committee, one
 of the panels likely to shape tobacco legislation,
 said Congress "will want sufficient funding of
 state and federal public-health costs caused by
 smoking."

 President Seeks FDA Role

 Last week, President Clinton called for changes in
 the proposed settlement, demanding that the Food
 and Drug Administration be authorized to control
 nicotine levels in tobacco products and calling for
 price increases of as much as $1.50 a pack to
 attack smoking among youths.

 The proposed settlement is being reviewed on
 Capitol Hill, which must come to terms with the
 president and pass legislation for its provisions
 to take effect. Congress isn't expected to begin
 the process in earnest until next year.

 But the FTC's Mr. Pitofsky said price increases
 could give tobacco companies too much leeway to
 boost profits. "Prices per pack ought to go up, but
 the question is how much and where is the money
 going to go?" he said. "Even without the antitrust
 exemption, if prices rise $1.50 a pack, that
 produces vast revenues that are not yet accounted
 for."

 Richard Scruggs, a plaintiffs attorney representing
 several states that sued the industry, said, "The
 intent of the settlement was to give the industry
 an exemption only to the extent necessary to fund
 the settlement. If the provision is too broad,
 we'll work to narrow it." He added that the
 settlement agreement was a "term sheet" rather than
 a detailed piece of legislation.

 Moore Rejects 'Collusion'

 Added Michael Moore of Mississippi, the lead
 negotiator for the state attorneys general, said,
 "We're certainly not for any collusion."

 Mr. Moore said, however, "We always thought tobacco
 companies would raise prices higher than what they
 had to for the settlement, but truthfully we
 thought that was a good thing from a public-health
 perspective."

 Industry lawyers say the tobacco companies are
 willing to work with the FTC to narrow the
 antitrust exemption. As drafted, it would permit
 tobacco companies "to jointly confer, coordinate or
 act in concert" to reach the settlement's goals,
 including eliminating billboard advertising and
 vending-machine sales. The companies, the attorneys
 said, believe they need the exemption to carry out
 these goals without violating antitrust laws.

 But Mr. Pitofsky said the provision, "although
 possibly not intended ... would allow the tobacco
 companies to coordinate their behavior and raise
 prices far in excess of levels necessary to cover
 the annual payments and keep the extra profits for
 themselves."

 Highly Concentrated Industry

 The FTC study said the tobacco industry has
 historically passed on to consumers more than
 government-required price increases. That is in
 part because the industry is highly concentrated,
 there are high barriers to entry by competitors,
 and customers are relatively insensitive to price
 increases.

 Rep. Martin Meehan said the exemption's effect "has
 been completely overlooked" and provides the
 industry with benefits "that go well beyond the
 original justification." Indeed, the Democrat from
 Massachusetts said the companies can make the
 required payments without it.

 Republican Orrin Hatch of Utah, who as chairman of
 the Senate Judiciary Committee will play a crucial
 role in drafting legislation, said he is working
 with Ohio Republican Mike DeWine, chairman of the
 Senate antitrust subcommittee, to ensure that "any
 necessary antitrust exemption will be narrowly
 tailored to accomplish the legislative goal of
 reducing [youth] smoking."

 Separately, Brooke Group Ltd.'s Liggett Group Inc.
 unit said it settled Nevada's tobacco-related
 Medicaid-reimbursement claims. Nevada is one of
 several states that filed suit against tobacco
 companies to cover billions of dollars in Medicaid
 costs. Among the terms of the settlement, the unit
 will put an added warning on its packs stating
 "smoking is addictive," and agreed to pay as much
 as 22.5% of its pretax earnings into a settlement
 fund for the next 25 years.

                    Return to top of page
     Copyright (c) 1997 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights
                          Reserved.
