
          October 17, 1997

          NY TImes on the web

          Some Insurers to Increase Rates for Large Vehicles

          By KEITH BRADSHER

          [D] ETROIT -- Alarmed by research showing that sport
              utility vehicles and pickup trucks are inflicting
          unusually costly harm to cars and their occupants in
          collisions, some big insurers are raising liability
          rates on the oversize vehicles in what could amount to
          the largest overhaul of liability coverage since the
          rise of no-fault laws a quarter-century ago.

          To convince auto makers that such vehicles must be
          modified to make them less dangerous, the insurers are
          also bankrolling new studies and planning an ambitious
          series of crash tests.

          For motorists, the pocketbook effects of the overhaul of
          insurance rates could prove startling: a liability rate
          increase of up to 20 percent for drivers of sport
          utility vehicles and pickups over the next several years
          and a cut of up to 10 percent for car owners. That will
          likely mean an extra $50 to $700 a year in liability
          insurance payments for the first group, depending on
          current rates, and a savings of $25 to $350 for car
          owners.

          Two of the nation's largest insurers, Farmers Insurance
          Group and Progressive Corp., have already begun changing
          the way they calculate their rates. Executives at
          Allstate, Nationwide, Geico and USAA said they were
          reviewing the issue but were unlikely to make any
          decisions until they had more data, including broad
          studies by industry groups that will not be completed
          until next spring.

          Actuaries for Farmers and Progressive said that the
          reason for their rate moves was simple: Their customers
          who drive sport utility vehicles and pickups have been
          incurring unusually expensive claims to cover the damage
          and injuries they inflict during accidents. Rather than
          continuing to spread the extra cost among all drivers,
          including car owners, these insurers are starting to set
          rates accordingly.

          "It's pretty obvious the size and weight of these
          vehicles and the way they're built is contributing to
          the loss experience," said Jonathan Adkisson, an actuary
          at Farmers, a unit of BAT Industries and the nation's
          third-largest insurer after State Farm and Allstate.
          "When an accident occurs, the heavier vehicles are more
          likely to inflict damage and injuries, and these result
          in larger claims, so it seems appropriate to charge the
          drivers of those vehicles higher premiums."

          The biggest sport utility vehicles, like the Ford
          Expedition and the Chevrolet Suburban, weigh 5,200 to
          6,000 pounds, while midsize sedans typically weigh 2,900
          to 3,300 pounds. Sport utility vehicles also ride higher
          off the ground, so they tend to override the occupant
          protection features of cars and tend to have stiff
          frames that crumple the other vehicle in crashes.

          Liability coverage applies only to property damage and
          injuries caused to others by the policyholder. Rates for
          collision coverage, which applies to repairs of a
          policyholder's own vehicle, already take into account
          the fact that sport utility vehicles and pickups suffer
          less damage in crashes.

          Separate rates to cover the policyholder's injuries
          generally do not take into account the extra protection
          that these bigger vehicles provide to their occupants
          but are beginning to do so. But adjustments to this
          coverage offset only a small part of the extra liability
          cost.

          If the full liability rate increase goes into effect,
          drivers of sport utility vehicles and pickups will be
          paying substantially larger total insurance bills.

          Two groups in Washington, financed by most of the
          nation's insurers, are working on studies that will
          include six to 10 crash tests pitting sport utility
          vehicles against cars. The tests are partly intended to
          put pressure on federal regulators, who have repeatedly
          postponed such studies. Regulators have just begun
          planning six crash tests, which will begin this winter.

          Two crash tests already conducted in Europe by
          independent researchers found that sport utility
          vehicles, because of their height and weight, caused
          substantial damage to cars' passenger compartments.

          The insurers want auto makers to design vehicles that
          are more compatible in crashes, said Brian O'Neill,
          president of the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety
          and the Highway Loss Data Institute, the Washington
          groups conducting the studies. "We need the
          manufacturers to say, 'Wait a minute, what happens when
          the Ford Expedition hits the Ford Escort,' " he said.

          The controversy over the safety of air bags had
          distracted insurers until recently from the more
          important safety issue of sport utility vehicles, he
          added.

          Auto industry executives say they are constantly
          conducting research into ways to reduce the damage their
          products inflict -- indeed, Ford has long been Detroit's
          leader on many safety issues. But they also contend that
          some incompatibility is inevitable because Americans
          want a range of vehicle sizes. Helen Petrauskas, Ford's
          vice president for environmental and safety engineering,
          said that higher rates of seat belt use and reductions
          in drunken driving could yield greater safety gains than
          design changes in sport utility vehicles.

          While the number of very large sport utility vehicles is
          rising quickly, the likelihood that any single big sport
          utility vehicle will kill a car occupant is falling,
          according to new research by Ford. It attributes the
          improvement partly to greater use of seat belts and air
          bags, partly to better-designed cars and partly to a
          shift in who drives sport utility vehicles. Suburban
          families are increasingly replacing single men as
          owners.

          But what is particularly interesting about the Farmers
          and Progressive research is that unlike that of Ford,
          the insurers were able to take into account differences
          in driver age, sex, location and previous driving
          record. And what the insurers have found is further
          evidence of a safety problem: that the same driver will
          inflict considerably greater damage and injuries when
          driving a sport utility of almost any size than when
          driving a car.

          The industry research groups headed by O'Neill are
          conducting further studies. The safety institute intends
          to release a statistical study this fall of the death
          toll inflicted by sport utility vehicles and pickups. In
          a separate study next spring, the safety institute plans
          up to 10 crash tests.

          The data institute is drafting a third study, scheduled
          for release next April, that will look at insurers'
          costs to repair vehicles hit by sport utility vehicles
          and pickups.

          Kim Hazelbaker, the institute's senior vice president,
          who is overseeing the study, said that his initial
          computer data had already showed a significant problem
          that was likely to provoke industry action. The
          institute had earlier found that property damage
          liability costs for insurers from accidents involving
          large sport utility vehicles were 72 percent higher than
          for the average car. By contrast, property damage caused
          by large luxury cars was 19 percent below the average.

          The institute first studied the issue in 1994. But most
          insurers showed limited interest, Hazelbaker said, until
          sales of the biggest sport utility vehicles began
          surging a year ago and until a series of articles in The
          New York Times over the last seven months described the
          dangers that the bigger vehicles pose.

          Progressive actually began making slight adjustments to
          liability rates by vehicle model in the 1980s, and it
          has been moving to much larger adjustments over the last
          two years as the range of family vehicles on the road
          has widened. It now calculates liability rates based on
          a motorist's age, driving record and other variables and
          then increases the total by up to 20 percent for the
          biggest and most dangerous sport utility vehicles and
          pickups and by roughly 8 percent for smaller models. It
          subtracts 10 percent for the least dangerous car models.

          But Progressive has long been a maverick in the
          collegial insurance industry. Much more significant is
          the fact that before Farmers Insurance entered the
          Pennsylvania market last month, it quietly chose for the
          first time to file a rate schedule with regulators that
          adjusts liability premiums by vehicle model. The move by
          Farmers puts pressure on existing insurers in
          Pennsylvania to follow suit; their alternative is to
          risk losing car owners who could find a better deal at
          Farmers while being stuck with less profitable drivers
          of sport utility vehicles.

          It is not clear how fast competition will force insurers
          nationwide to adjust liability rates by model. Insurers
          have been reluctant to move quickly -- even Farmers has
          not decided to act in its more established markets.
          Calculating such rates can be expensive, requiring the
          training of agents and the reprogramming of computers.
          An insurer that imposes big rate increases for sport
          utility vehicles could also drive many customers to
          rivals that do not raise rates. Insurers, performing
          similar calculations to those Progressive has made, are
          likely to make comparable rate adjustments, as Farmers
          has already done in Pennsylvania.

          Adjusting rates by vehicle would be the biggest change
          in automotive liability insurance since no-fault laws
          became popular in some states a quarter-century ago,
          said Howard Cohen, vice president for actuarial research
          at Geico. No-fault laws tend to make liability insurance
          less expensive but do not eliminate it.

          Only one big insurer is actively hostile to adjusting
          liability rates by model: State Farm, the industry
          leader with 18.8 percent of the market. Dale Nelson, a
          State Farm actuary, said the insurer tracked its
          combined bodily injury and property damage liability
          costs by model and had found higher costs only for large
          pickup trucks, which it has not bothered to reflect in
          its rates.

          But State Farm's experience often differs from other
          insurers because it has an unusual number of older,
          rural customers. And Nelson's views offer little
          reassurance for car drivers: sport utility vehicles may
          actually save insurers money in a few accidents, he
          said, by killing people who might otherwise have
          survived with serious injuries. Severe injuries tend to
          produce larger settlements than deaths, he explained.

          The Allstate Insurance Group is more interested in
          adjusting liability rates. "What I would envision is a
          liability system that varies rates more finely by make
          and model," said Michael LaMonica, Allstate's vice
          president for automotive insurance pricing.

          The industry's trade groups are convinced that liability
          rates by model are almost inevitable. Sean Mooney, chief
          economist of the Insurance Information Institute in New
          York, said that the growing power of computers made it
          easier to calculate rates based on more variables and
          that competition forced insurers to use such
          calculations.

          Since the 1970s, insurers have been using vehicle model
          data to calculate rates for theft and collision
          insurance. Sport utility vehicles are so sturdily built
          and so heavy that they suffer relatively little damage
          in crashes, and this is reflected in generally lower
          collision rates for them. Because liability rates are
          not similarly adjusted, the overall cost of insuring a
          sport utility vehicle can actually be cheaper now than
          insuring a similarly priced car.

          Most insurers also do not adjust their rates by vehicle
          model for personal injury insurance, which covers some
          initial expenses for injuries suffered by a policyholder
          during an accident. Because occupants in sport utility
          vehicles and pickups suffer slightly fewer injuries in
          accidents, Farmers offers them a lower rate for this
          coverage in Pennsylvania and Progressive does so
          nationwide.

          But the reduction offsets only a small fraction of the
          higher liability rates imposed by those companies
          because personal injury coverage does not include pain
          and suffering payments or legal fees and thus is much
          cheaper than liability coverage. Only 40 percent of all
          insured motorists nationwide take personal injury
          insurance because it is required by just 13 states,
          including New York, and often overlaps with
          employer-provided health care policies.

          Rather than calculate liability rates by model, many
          insurers have been relying instead on rules of thumb
          that were developed decades ago. Allstate, for instance,
          gives a 10 percent discount on bodily injury and
          property damage liability rates for subcompact cars
          weighing less than 2,100 pounds because lighter vehicles
          do less damage in collisions. But Allstate does not
          charge extra for sport utility vehicles that weigh three
          times as much.

          The Insurance Services Office, which is owned mainly by
          643 small insurers and helps them calculate rates, uses
          an equally outdated system. It has five broad categories
          based on the ratio of a vehicle's weight to horsepower,
          a system calculated in the 1970s to penalize sports cars
          that are lightweight but very powerful. But that formula
          now puts sport utility vehicles in the best category for
          liability insurance because of their weight.

          "The system just doesn't work anymore," said Chris
          Guidette, a spokesman for the Insurance Services Office,
          adding that the office plans to begin computer analyses
          soon to develop a better system.

          The question now is whether higher rates will affect the
          sale of sport utility vehicles. When insurers raised
          collision rates for so-called muscle cars in the 1970s,
          sales slumped.

          But buyers of sport utility vehicles are often so
          prosperous that they may not notice the extra cost. The
          typical Chevrolet Suburban buyer now earns more than the
          typical Cadillac buyer, while the average household
          buying a Range Rover or Lexus LX450 earns $360,000 a
          year.

          To leave the rates as is, however, could open the
          insurance industry to criticism, Mooney said. Flat
          liability rates tend to put an unfair burden on
          lower-income car drivers, who are in effect subsidizing
          the affluent owners of sport utility vehicles, he said.

          "That's an issue that we certainly have to look at,"
          Allstate's LaMonica said.


                Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
