http://www.isoc.org/isoc/whatis/conferences/inet/96/proceedings/g1/g1_2.htm

The Internet: Access Avenue for Videoconferencing

Ramiro Calvo <_ramiro@apple.com_>
Apple Computer, Inc.
1 Infinite Loop, MS 301-4H
Cupertino, California 95014, USA

Venilde Jeronimo <_jeronimv@cgs.edu_>
Center for Politics and Economics
Claremont Graduate School
170 East Tenth Street
Claremont, California 91711, USA

Abstract

The affordability of multimedia personal computers, the expanding use of  
local- and wide-area networks, and the emergence of digital audio and video  
technologies that make possible transmission of voice and images over  
existing computer networks are key developments that now allow  
videoconferencing (VC) systems to become mainstream. Of key importance for  
the widespread use of VC is the increasing acceptance of the Internet as a  
new paradigm for communications. This leads us to suggest that the growing  
global connectivity available through the Internet provides the necessary  
access avenue for voice and video communications to become mainstream.  
Furthermore, we suggest that VC will be a sought-after access tool and will  
make possible a new generation of Internet features for a wide range of uses  
and users in the commercial and noncommercial sectors. The recent  
proliferation of Internet voice and video providers and Internet congestion  
are also addressed in this paper, as well as the question of whether  
universal service should be redefined to include access to the Internet.

1. Introduction

A century and a half has passed since 1851, when Nathaniel Hawthorne  
envisioned the information age as upon us [1]:

It's a fact ... that, by means of electricity, the world of matter has  
become a great nerve, vibrating thousands of miles in a breathless point of  
time? Rather, the round globe is a vast head, a brain, instinct with  
intelligence or, shall we say, it itself a thought, nothing but thought, and  
no longer the substance which we deemed it!

By the early 1960s, Marshall McLuhan used the term "global village" to  
denote worldwide communication through electronic systems, which he  
prophesied would lead to a coalescence of human awareness into a single  
global community [2]. Today, an information society is said to be upon us in  
which the saturation and importance to daily living of telephones, media  
systems, and computer networks are characteristic of our increasingly  
technological lifestyles [3].

The growing need to support technical and social activity that occurs across  
geographic distances in this information age, however, has not been fully  
satisfied by the current technologies of phones, faxes, electronic mail, and  
videoconference rooms [4]. Videoconferencing (VC) systems have been promoted  
as a technology to support remote collaboration since AT&T introduced the  
Picturephone in 1964 (Table 1), yet this vision has not been fully realized.  
A study conducted by Johansen, Hansell, and Green, addressing the question  
why teleconferencing was not implemented in business environments on the  
scale envisioned in the early 1970s, suggests that the optimistic demand for  
forecasts was based on the assumption that readiness factors (e.g., economic  
and social trends, technological developments) would rapidly evolve into  
enabling forces (e.g., user-oriented systems, support services, effective  
user networks) [5]. The Johansen et al. study focused on the use of  
videoconference rooms in business, but recent technical and infrastructural  
developments prompt the adoption and use of VC systems on a much larger scale  
than previously imagined.

Table 1. History of videoconferencing (VC) technology

* 1964: AT&T shows Picturephone, World's Fair, New York
* 1970: AT&T offers Picturephone for $160 per month
* 1982: Compression Labs begins selling $250,000 VC system, $1,000 per hour lines
* 1986: PictureTel's $80,000 VC system, $100 per hour lines
* 1987: Mitsubishi sells $1,500 still-picture phone
* 1989: Mitsubishi drops still-picture phone
* 1991: PictureTel unveils $20,000 black-and-white VC system, $30 per hour lines
* 1991: IBM and PictureTel demonstrate videophone on PC
* 1992: AT&T's $1,500 videophone for home market
* 1994: Cornell develops CU-SeeMe software for Internet
* 1995: Apple's QuickTime for under $200

Source: Modified from Wall Street Journal (27 February 1996).

First, technological advances have made the cost of VC plummet. In the  
1970s, color cameras the size of a two-drawer file cabinet required studio  
lighting and sophisticated daily setup and maintenance at a cost of $50,000  
to $100,000. In the 1980s, conference environments used shoebox-sized cameras  
at a cost of $5,000 to $10,000. Today, for $200, an end user can acquire a  
desktop VC kit that includes a digital camera and software to be used at home  
or work.

Second, several developments have allowed VC applications to become  
mainstream: the affordability of multimedia personal computers, the expanding  
use of local-area networks (LANs) and wide-area networks (WANs), and the  
emergence of digital audio and video technologies that allow voice and images  
to be transmitted over existing computer networks. Of key importance for the  
expanding use of VC applications is the Internet--the network of  
networks--which is increasingly accepted as a new paradigm for communications  
[6]. We suggest that the growing global connectivity available through the  
Internet provides the necessary gateway for the widespread use of audio and  
video communications. By the end of 1995, there were an estimated 4,852,000  
Internet hosts worldwide, with Internet access points growing at an estimated  
50 percent per month and subscriber growth close to 30 percent per month.

The popularity of the Internet as a medium of communication has recently led  
the America's Carriers Telecommunications Association (ACTA), a trade  
association of independent long distance carriers, to file a petition with  
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to stop companies from selling  
software and hardware products that enable use of the Internet to supply  
voice long-distance and international services unless these companies are  
regulated as long-distance carriers. This policy development and its  
implications for Internet video communications, and the question of whether  
universal service should be redefined to include access to the Internet are  
briefly discussed in the last section of this paper. The following section  
defines VC as it is discussed here, as well as the key technological  
developments responsible for the recent VC revolution. There is a brief  
section on Internet voice and video communication providers versus telecom  
carriers and one on concerns about Internet congestion.

2. Videoconferencing technology

2.1. The infrastructure evolution

Videoconferencing has an array of definitions; here we use a simple one: VC  
is interactive and collaborative audio and video communication between two or  
more people in different locations. In some cases, collaboration may extend  
to sharing of documents and applications. This "revolution" is a result of  
the evolution of a variety of technologies that have been put in place for  
reasons other than VC. The development of multimedia personal computers and  
LANs and WANs has played an important role in the development of the VC  
market. We must first look into these technologies in order to better  
understand the potential of VC today.

The "dashboard" of the information universe, the personal computer, is  
playing a key role in the VC revolution. In recent years, multimedia PCs have  
become commonplace at work and in the home. Multimedia PCs are characterized  
by their ability to capture and play back audio and video data, their use of  
100 MHz+ processors, and their built-in networking capabilities.

Apart from the new functions added to personal computers, the most dramatic  
change is the increase in processor power. In the early 1980s, PCs used a 6  
MHz processor; today's computers are powered by 200 MHz processors with wide  
32-bit buses, advanced floating-point units, and extensive use of pipelining.  
This increase in computational power has made possible software-only audio  
and video compressors. In effect, as the processing speed increases, so does  
the compression ratio, which in turn reduces network bandwidth requirements.

At the same time, built-in network interfaces have become commonplace. Many  
PCs come with 10-megabit Ethernet coupled with high-performance direct memory  
access (DMA) processors able to handle steady streams of digitized data.  
Computer peripherals such as monitors have also evolved. Not long ago,  
12-inch text-only black-and-white (or green) monitors were state of the art.  
We now see 17- and 21-inch color graphics monitors capable of updating 1024 x  
768 pixels at 75 times per second, offering much higher picture quality than  
a television set.

Another key requirement of VC is the availability of interconnected personal  
computers. When people first started using PCs, the required connectivity  
was a simple serial interface between the computer and its printer. Then  
small groups of computer users emerged, creating the need to exchange files  
among themselves through small LANs. When universities and mid-size to large  
companies required small workgroups to interact with each other, clusters of  
Ethernet LANs were tied together into larger campus networks with Fiber  
Distributed Data Interface (FDDI) backbone networks. Today's campus networks  
connect to each other, creating a network of networks, through dedicated or  
shared T1 and T3 leased lines.

With the success of the Internet, Internet service providers (ISPs) are now  
bringing this network of networks to the home. The result is that we now have  
a critical mass of computers worldwide connected to one another, just like  
the telephone system.

Not only is the entire world becoming interconnected, but the networks are  
getting faster. For example, not too long ago, connectivity between PCs  
consisted of point-to-point 300-baud modem connections. We now have worldwide  
connections via the Internet at 28,800 baud (V.34), 128,000 bps (ISDN),  
1,544,000 bps (T1), and 45,000,000 bps (T3). With cable modems and  
asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) networks, megabit networks to the home could  
soon become yet another low-cost alternative for Internet users. At work,  
LANs have gone from 230 kbps with LocalTalk, to 10 Mbps with Ethernet, to 100  
Mbps with Fast Ethernet, FDDI, and ATM. This increase in capacity has  
resulted from improvements in various technical areas: modulation techniques  
used in modems, encoding schemes for sending high-speed data across copper  
cable, the development of single-mode fiber optic cable used in  
cross-continental connections, and low-cost chip technology able to operate  
at gigahertz speeds.

With the availability of powerful personal computers and easily accessible  
digital networks, the basic infrastructure for inexpensive VC is now in  
place. The point of intersection between the required network bandwidth for  
the transmission of digitized audio and video data and the availability of  
low-cost network bandwidth represents a major paradigm shift. The paradigm  
shift for audioconferencing over the Internet occurred within the past year,  
and we believe a similar shift is now occurring for videoconferencing.

Unfortunately, the dramatic increases in available bandwidth and  
improvements in data compression will not be enough to prevent congestion on  
the Internet due to the explosion in the number of Internet users. We predict  
that aggregate bandwidth needs will most likely overtake technological  
progress. As a result, we believe ISPs will compete for customers by offering  
"uncongested" Internet access, creating a huge demand for gigabit networks.  
This can only be good news for telecom carriers that lease digital networks.

2.2. Inside videoconferencing software

VC solutions build on three fundamental building blocks: audio and video  
digitizers, fast microprocessors, and a built-in network interface. As  
mentioned before, all three building blocks are now considered basic  
functions offered in hundreds of thousands of multimedia PCs. With these  
building blocks, companies have been able to develop solutions that support  
point-to-point, multiparty, and broadcast conferencing systems. Since network  
protocol stacks and compressors/decompressors (CODECs) are implemented in  
software, VC systems can be easily upgraded over the Internet with  
algorithmic improvements. It is therefore critical to first build software  
infrastructures capable of handling a wide variety of network protocols and  
compression algorithms.

VC software is a union of two of the most challenging computer science  
topics: real-time processing and distributed processing. Unfortunately, the  
Internet and the PC were designed for store-and-forward transactions.  
Developers have therefore relied on raw computational power and simple  
buffering mechanisms to work around the lack of real-time network and  
operating system (OS) services.

Simple buffering mechanisms are used to smooth out the variable OS and  
network response time. To reduce increasing end-to-end delays caused by  
buffering mechanisms, many conferencing systems use protocols that move data  
in a best-effort manner with simple error detection algorithms that avoid  
end-to-end error recovery mechanisms.

Finally, algorithms for monitoring central processing units (CPUs) and  
network loads are used to dynamically determine the rate at which video data  
are transmitted. It is critical to avoid overloading CPUs and networks to  
ensure that existing e-mail and file transfer services are not affected. In  
addition, overloaded systems typically waste network bandwidth by  
transmitting data that may never reach or be used by the receiving side.

As the VC market heats up, development for real-time network and OS  
solutions will increase. With real-time services incorporated into  
next-generation networks and OSs, applications will be able to count on  
processor time for network protocols and software CODECs, which would reduce  
buffering requirements and end-to-end delays. With next-generation routers,  
efficient use of IP multicast will improve network bandwidth use by avoiding  
needless duplication of data in multipoint connections. Compression  
algorithms will continue to improve as the availability of CPU cycles  
increases. In summary, most solutions being developed are scalable, so they  
can take advantage of increased processing power, new protocols, and new  
network infrastructures.

2.3. Standards

A key factor in the success of the telephone and the fax machine has been  
the ability to communicate without regard to the type of equipment used at  
either end. The goal of the VC industry must be to have a "video dial tone"  
if it is to become truly ubiquitous. The most popular VC standard to date is  
H.320. which ensures interoperability between large boardrooms, roll-abouts,  
and PC-based VC systems. However, H.320 requires dedicated circuit-switched  
network services, such as ISDN or T1 lines. With the emergence of the  
Internet, which uses both circuit- and packet-switched networks, we will see  
the development of new standards more appropriate for this mixed environment.

Today's Internet VC products are based primarily on proprietary protocols,  
so they are noninteroperable. The industry is working toward a new set of  
standards that ensure interoperability in multimedia data formats, as well as  
for document sharing. The standards come from the Internet Engineering Task  
Force (IETF) as well as the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), as  
shown in Table 2.

Table 2. Related Internet videoconferencing standards


                       Industry
Function               Standard         Notes
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Audio input            Line-in signal   * 8, 11, 22, 44 kHz sample rate
                       level              8 or 16 bits per sample with mono  
or stereo inputs

Video input            NTSC             * National Television System  
Committee (used in
                                          Americas and Asia)
                       PAL              * Phase Alternation Line (used in  
Europe, except in
                                          France, where SECAM is used)

Audio compression      G.711            * 64 kbps, 2:1 compression with a  
128 kbps source
                       G.722            * 64 kpbs, 4:1 compression with a  
256 kbps source
                       G.728            * 16 kbps, 8:1 compression with a  
128 kbps source
                       G.723            * 6.4 kbps, 20:1 compression with a  
128 kbps source
                                        * 5.3 kbps, 24:1 compression with a  
128 kbps source
                       GSM              * 13.3 kbps, 10:1 compression with a  
128 kbps source

Video compression      H.261            * Tailored for 50 kbps to 1.2 Mbps  
data channels
                                          QSIF = 176 pixels x 144 pixels x  
24 bits/pixel
                                          SIF = 352 pixels x 288 pixels x 24  
bits/pixel
                       H.263            * Tailored for 15 kbps to 128 kbps  
data channels
                                          QSIF = 176 pixels x 144 pixels x  
24 bits/pixel

Shared network         RTP              * IETF standard
protocols              H.323            * ITU standard

Collaboration          T.120            * Support for multipoint connections  
with shared
                                          whiteboard and file transfer capabilities

Application/document   None             * To date, only proprietary  
solutions offer
sharing                                   this function
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Source: Authors' compilation.

2.4. What's next?

Despite the enormous progress thus far, much work remains. First, we  
challenge the Internet Society to provide a "universal" directory service for  
e-mail as well as IP addresses for VC for those who want to be published.  
Exchanging e-mail as well as VC IP addresses at social gatherings is becoming  
the pickup line of the '90s. This information is typically exchanged  
verbally, but what is really needed are electronic directory services. Some  
already exist, but they are not broad enough to be truly useful.

Second, we hope ISPs will provide static IP addresses to all subscribers.  
Currently, dynamic IP addresses make it difficult to create directory  
services (or phone books) for VC users. Can you imagine how useful (or  
useless) e-mail would be if your address changed every time you connected to  
the Internet? This is the case with dynamic IP addresses and VC. As the  
market matures, software that uses similar network protocols and consistent  
human interface designs will win customers over. For example, the human  
interface of the telephone has universally recognizable dial tones, ringing  
signals, and busy signals. We hope that Internet VC will be just as easy to  
use and just as universally compatible. Our prediction is that continuous  
Internet connections will soon become affordable. This will allow users to  
receive unscheduled VC calls much as they receive telephone calls today.  
Currently, home users must first connect to the Internet before being able to  
receive phone calls through the Internet. Until this changes, Internet  
conferencing will remain a hobby, instead of the true communications tool it  
promises to be.

Third, the biggest challenge is one of network bandwidth. The number of  
Internet users is increasing, the bandwidth requirements put on the network  
by each user are increasing, and the length of time users stay on the network  
is also increasing--all of which adds up to one very big global traffic jam.  
Fortunately, digital fiber optic networks have tremendous capacity. For  
example, a single cable containing 24 fiber optic strands can support  
approximately 5 million simultaneous videoconferences: n = sb/u, where n is  
the number of users (5 million), s is the number of strands per cable (24), b  
is the bandwidth per strand (6 Gbps), and u is the bandwidth per user (28.8  
kbps).

Internet traffic, with VC as part of it, is finally generating the digital  
traffic volume for which most phone companies have been waiting. Bandwidth  
availability may become the main differentiator among private online services  
and ISPs. Today, these services are evaluated by "on-ramp access speeds"  
(e.g., 14.4, 28.8, or 128 kbps). In the future, we expect that they will also  
be evaluated by the backbone network bandwidth available.

3. Internet voice and video communications

Over the past decade, many people have experimented with the idea of  
bringing the telephone, with its real-time communications technology, to the  
Internet via the desktop computer. Several programs were released in the  
beginning of 1995 to support this concept; Apple Computer's QuickTime is an  
example. These programs do not represent a "half-and-half integration" with  
conventional telephony, but rather an entirely parallel and independent  
system [7]. Basically, they allow the Internet to be used to make  
computer-to-computer long-distance and international audio and video calls.  
These systems are being targeted for home use (e.g., for personal  
communications and online shopping) and are expected to become as standard as  
telephones and faxes are today [8]. Outside of home use, many companies are  
installing desktop VC systems in branch offices to allow executives and  
employees to connect to headquarters, other employees, or clients and  
customers. Phone and videophone connections can now be built into Web pages,  
which can be useful to the corporate world. For instance, users can have  
simultaneous face-to-face meetings and, if necessary, jointly view and edit a  
document on the Web. Educational facilities (e.g., for distance learning),  
nonprofit organizations, and government entities are also potential users of  
audio and video systems.

The advent of providers of Internet voice and video systems raises several  
questions, two of which we briefly discuss here. With the increasing  
popularity of the Internet as a communications medium, (1) is use of the  
Internet for voice and video communications a competitive threat to phone  
companies, and (2) how can ISPs deal with Internet congestion?

3.1. Internet phone and video providers versus phone companies: A simple  
cost calculation

Internet calling, which began as an amusing pastime a year ago, is now  
starting to be used by an array of users as a less expensive medium to  
transmit voice and video and bypass high long-distance and international  
charges. As the supply (production) of Internet audio and video  
communications systems increases, the cost of production per unit falls  
(assuming some learning curve exists). A cost difference appears to exist  
between telephone companies and Internet phone providers; it is likely to  
decrease further over time. The cost to a user of Internet telephony is  
basically the cost for the Internet connection. Unlike phone companies, which  
charge according to time and distance (the longer you talk and the farther  
you call, the more you pay), Internet connections (even though they travel  
the same wires) are sold at flat monthly rates, and the connection to an ISP  
is usually a local call. For instance, ISPs may charge users approximately  
$10 for five hours of access and then approximately $3 for each additional  
hour. Five hours is 300 minutes, divided by $10 is 3.3 cents per minute. The  
average residential long-distance call costs about 22 cents per minute--seven  
times as much. Even with additional hours at $3 each, the ISP costs only 5  
cents per minute, still much less than the 22 cents charged by telephone  
companies.

Several problems can be identified with Internet calling. First, lack of  
interoperability imposes a cost. The cost implied by interoperability  
disappears within just a few years, however, due to faster growth of the  
industry with interoperable components. Although costs begin at a higher  
point, production moves quickly down the learning curve, resulting in  
accelerated growth and lower prices compared to proprietary systems [9].  
Interoperability is a result of the economic incentives for cooperation that  
exist among suppliers who are induced by the positive network externalities  
associated with being on the Internet. Suppliers of Internet voice and video  
services are multiplying, with many collaborating on interoperable protocols,  
and third-party developers are also creating the necessary protocols to  
connect different systems.

Second, a user must have a sound card and a modem, although these are now  
standard on most personal computers, which are increasingly affordable.

A third drawback to Internet calling is poor quality and convenience (all  
calling parties must be logged on); however, no one disputes that technology  
is improving in this area.

Nevertheless, current demand seems to be optimistic. An estimated 1.5  
million Internet phone products have been shipped [10]; 20,000 individuals  
now use Internet phone software regularly [11]; and 2,000 downloads are being  
reported by WebPhone alone [12]. By the end of the year, it will not be a  
surprise to have Internet telephony as a standard feature in Web browser  
programs and videophone connections built into many Web pages. Call-back  
systems are another area in which the Internet can be used to bypass and  
compete with phone networks.

3.2. Internet traffic jams

As mentioned earlier, the biggest challenge is network bandwidth. While  
digital networks have tremendous capacity, there is concern about Internet  
congestion, especially with the increased demand for voice and video  
communications [13]. With Internet traffic jams, users have begun to  
experience delays, and some of these users may pay more to circumvent jams.  
This has led the economic community to characterize the pricing structure of  
the Internet as suboptimal. Three options to price the Internet for  
congestion control and interconnection are being discussed: (1) flat-rate  
pricing, (2) use-sensitive pricing, and (3) transaction-based pricing [14].  
The first option refers to the fee users pay today to connect, regardless of  
the amount of information sent; the second and third options are new.

With use-sensitive pricing, users pay a portion of their Internet bill for a  
connection and a portion for each bit sent or received. Options could  
include use-sensitive pricing during peak hours and flat-rate pricing off  
peak. As for the transaction-based pricing option, it is determined by the  
characteristics of the transaction and not by the number of bits. Some  
economists argue that, unlike the telephone system, it is difficult for the  
Internet to support transaction-based pricing because of its distributed  
computing environment; on the other hand, interconnection points with  
flat-fee settlements may provide improper incentives for use and may lead to  
inequitable cost recovery by the interconnected firms [15]. Use-sensitive  
pricing has recently been introduced by Internet access providers such as  
BBN, MCI, and Uunet [16]. There does not seem to be a consensus on which  
pricing option is best for congestion and interconnection problems. There  
does appear to be a consensus, however, that not all traffic on the Internet  
needs to be treated the same, and therefore service qualities can affect  
resource allocation and pricing [17]. This view supports pricing based on  
service quality as possibly the only way to limit the demand on the  
guaranteed service quality.

The National Science Foundation (NSF) appears to favor some sort of  
prioritization of traffic over the Internet [18]. Recently, NSF introduced a  
new angle to its connections program associated with its concern over  
congestion. NSF will provide grants to college and university campus network  
service providers for applications that require high-performance networking.  
The hope is that the grants will stimulate the development of a technological  
option for the Internet to provide a new way of connection to give a  
guaranteed level of service at a national level. NSF's connections program is  
expected to spur the development of switches and routers to alleviate  
information bottlenecks. One solution might include prioritization of traffic  
on the Internet. This is analogous to postal services. To send a package, an  
individual has several options: overnight mail, first-class mail, or  
third-class mail. The cost of the package delivery depends on its  
designation. Another solution might involve diverting specially coded traffic  
to high-performance special-use networks, such as NSF's vBNS (very high  
speed Backbone Network Service).

4. Public policy issues

For several decades, telecommunications worldwide were regulated through a  
public utility paradigm, under the economic auspices of a natural monopoly  
and a public interest rationale (universal service) [19]. Today, for  
technical and economic reasons, telecommunications policy is undergoing  
transition and reevaluation in most countries. The telecommunications sector  
is being exposed to deregulation, liberalization, and privatization. Many  
countries are experimenting with flexible decentralization, which suggests  
that new competitors (many based on computer, mobile, or broadcast  
technologies) should be allowed to compete to provide a broad range of  
services, from telecommunications infrastructure to information services.

One medium that is only now receiving attention in policy circles is the use  
of the Internet for audio and video communications. While the global trend  
is toward deregulation, a host of issues are now surfacing in regard to  
whether the Internet needs government oversight:

* Use of the Internet by nontelephone companies to carry voice and video  
services--should these companies be regulated as long-distance carriers?
* Phone companies using the Internet for long-distance/international voice traffic
* Desktop application sharing versus copyright and licensing restriction of  
software
* Broadcasting over the Internet
* First amendment rights versus chat rooms and "Webcasting" content
* Right to privacy versus Internet "wiretapping"
* Universal access

All these issues merit attention. Here, we deal with the first and last  
issues because they are recent issues of public debate.

4.1. Regulating Internet voice and video communications

Currently, long-distance companies are regulated by the FCC and state  
regulatory commissions. They are required to pay access fees, file tariffs in  
order to provide long-distance telephone services, and contribute to the  
Universal Service Fund to extend phone service to the general population. On  
4 March 1996, ACTA (a trade association founded in 1985 by independent  
long-distance companies to serve the needs of small businesses) filed a  
petition [20] aimed at companies and software developers that provide voice  
services via the Internet but are not regulated by the FCC [21]. ACTA claims  
that these companies should be regulated in the same manner as all  
long-distance providers and should not be allowed to "bypass" long-distance  
charges. Furthermore, ACTA claims that, unlike phone companies, providers of  
voice services over the Internet do not contribute to the Universal Service  
Fund and thus do not extend their service to the general population. ACTA  
argues that Internet voice services are "unfair competition," and it has  
asked the FCC to define what sorts of communications are permissible over the  
Internet. The ACTA petition directly targets two-way voice communications,  
but this development has direct implications for VC, which is also a two-way  
communication system. Suppliers of such systems may be susceptible to  
regulations applicable to telecom carriers. Microsoft and Netscape recently  
announced audio and video strategies for the Internet. Does this mean they  
are now telecom carriers? Regulating voice and video providers that make use  
of the Internet as a communications medium would appear to limit these  
providers' ability to develop alternative distribution channels.

The ACTA development comes shortly after the passage of the 1996  
Telecommunications Act, signed by President Clinton on 8 February, which  
narrowly limits the FCC's authority to regulate the Internet [22]. However, a  
priority of FCC Chairman Reed Hundt is reform of the universal service  
regulations under the act [23]. Also, the act extends universal service  
obligations to all long-distance companies, not just the larger ones. The FCC  
is seeking comments on its public notice and is expected to make a judgment  
on whether to proceed with the ACTA petition by June. Complaints from phone  
companies about companies' use of the Internet for voice and video services  
are a new development in the United States, but the issue has already drawn  
the attention of governments in other countries, including Ireland,  
Switzerland, and South Africa [24].

4.2. Universal access

In addition to the ACTA petition asking the FCC to regulate what can be  
transmitted over the Internet, there is an ongoing public debate about  
whether the FCC should redefine universal service to include access to the  
Internet. This would involve the FCC in tracking areas of the country that do  
or do not have local dial-up access to the Internet and defining which  
services should be classified under universal access.

A two-year study by the Rand Institute concluded that universal Internet  
access for every American is "imperative" to the country's future and should  
be made a national goal [25]. The study advocates access to e-mail accounts  
and to appropriate computers and communications lines. However, various  
constituencies--private, nonprofit, and public entities--are concerned about  
what constitutes an agreed-upon definition of universal access. Does access  
refer only to an e-mail account, or will it also refer to other Internet  
features, such as the Web and audio and video communications? Access to a  
computer is implied, but to what type of connection? And is this access to be  
provided to each household (modeled after the telephone sector), or through  
a community point (modeled after the post office)? If the latter, public  
access points in libraries and other community centers would be established  
where the general public could gain access to the Internet.

Other concerns arise over who will pay for the information infrastructure  
and its use: Which mechanisms will cover the cost of providing effective  
access, and what are the public versus private roles in creating and  
operating such a service? Also, what role do individual states and  
communities have in implementing policy goals? The Rand study concludes that  
the free market alone is unlikely to provide universal access; it recommends  
government intervention to regulate the development of the information  
superhighway. Aside from the Universal Service Fund, we suggest an IP and  
domain name tax as one option to support the development of universal access  
through community points; another option is a tax levied on the general  
population.

5. Conclusion

We are witnessing the beginning of a significant phenomenon over the  
Internet: audio and video communications. The recent proliferation of  
suppliers of phone and video systems for use via the Internet does not  
necessarily mean that demand for such products will emerge. The silent  
underground movement of Internet phone users, however, gives us an indication  
that the demand for VC systems will indeed proliferate. The acceptance of  
the Internet as a new medium of communication has become the access avenue  
for VC to proliferate and become mainstream. This surely will not be a fad.

We mentioned options to price the Internet for congestion control and  
interconnection, and the question of whether the Internet is a threat to  
traditional telephone carriers. We briefly touched on recent policy issues,  
including the ACTA petition and universal access. We believe these must be  
taken seriously and are important to bring to the attention of the general  
population, where debate should take place over policy direction.

Acknowledgments

We thank Ke-Chiang Chu, Eric Emerson, and Eric Gradeler, whose comments have  
contributed to this paper. The views expressed in this paper are solely  
those of the authors.

Notes

[1] Hawthorne, N., The House of the Seven Gables and the Snow Image and  
Other Twice-Told Tales (Boston: Houghton, Mifflin, 1851).

[2] McLuhan, M., Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man (New York: New  
American Library, 1964). While McLuhan is often credited with coining the  
term "global village," Jarice Hanson, in Understanding Video: Applications,  
Impact, and Theory (London: Sage, 1987, p. 31), suggests the term actually  
originated with Samuel Morse, the inventor of the telegraph.

[3] Bell, D., The Coming of the Post-Industrial Society: A Venture in Social  
Forecasting (Harmondsworth: Penguin, Peregrine Books, 1976); Martin, J., The  
Wired Society (Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1978); Poster,  
M. The Mode of Poststructuralism and Social Context (Cambridge: Polity,  
1990); Webster, F., Theories of the Information Society (London: Routledge,  
1995, p. 1).

[4] Tang, J. C., and E. A. Isaacs, "Why Do Users Like Video? Studies of  
Multimedia-Supported Collaboration," Computer Supported Cooperative Work  
1:163, 1993.

[5] Johansen, R., K. J. Hansell, and D. Green, "Growth in Teleconferencing:  
Looking Beyond the Rhetoric of Readiness," Telecommunications Policy 5(4),  
December 1981.

[6] For a thorough history of the Internet, see Hart, Jeffrey A., Robert R.  
Reed, and Francois Bar, "The Building of the Internet: Implications for the  
Future of Broadband Networks," Telecommunications Policy, November 1992.

[7] Hapgood, F., "I-Phone," Wired 3(10):140, October 1995.

[8] Bulkeley, W., "Picture-Phone Marketers Target the Home PC," Wall Street  
Journal, 27 February 1996, p. B1.

[9] This observation was made by McKnight in reference to high-definition TV  
systems, although it appears to be applicable to VC systems in our case.  
Refer to McKnight, L., "Economics of Interoperability," Internet Economics  
Workshop, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 9-10 March 1995,  
_http://rpcp.mit.edu/workshops/cfp.html_.

[10] Verity, John W., "Try Beating These Long-Distance Rates," Business  
Week, 22 April 1996, p. 131.

[11] Mills, M., "Freebie Heebie-Jeebies: New Long Distance Calling via the  
Internet Scares Small Phone Firms," Washington Post, 8 March 1996, p. F1.

[12] Consummate Winsock Apps List, _http://www.cwsapps.com_.

[13] The Internet may be prone to abusive behavior by its users, leading to  
a degradation in that resource, as in Hardin's "tragedy of the commons"  
(Science, 1968). Economic theory suggests that the Internet can also be  
included as a common good, since it is a shared resource common to all  
Internet users. This has led to the conclusion that the growth of the  
Internet generates positive network externalities gained through the  
Internet's reliance on interoperable protocols. Refer to Bailey and McKnight,  
who consider the Internet not only in terms of its economic feature of  
positive externalities, but also in terms of its technical characteristics of  
statistical sharing and its policy objective of interoperability. Bailey, J.  
P., and L. W. McKnight, "Internet Economics: What Happens When  
Constituencies Collide," Internet Economics Workshop, MIT, Cambridge,  
Massachusetts, 9-10 March 1995, _http://rpcp.mit.edu/workshops/_.

[14] The challenge, then, is to develop an effective Internet pricing  
mechanism but, in doing so, not lose the benefits of interoperability and the  
positive network externalities currently gained through the Internet's  
reliance on statistical sharing (Bailey and McKnight 1995).

[15] Bailey and McKnight 1995.

[16] Verity 1996, p. 132.

[17] Shenker, S., "Service Models and Pricing Policies for an Integrated  
Services Internet," in B. Kahin and J. Keller (Eds.), Public Access to the  
Internet (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1995).

[18] National Science Foundation, press release, 14 March 1996 (contact:  
Mark Luker <_mluker@nsf.gov_>).

[19] Refer to Kahn, Alfred E., The Economics of Regulation, Vol. 1 (New  
York: Wiley, 1970) and Vol. 2 (1971); Panzar, John C., and Robert D. Willig,  
Contestable Markets and the Theory of Industry Structure (New York: Harcourt  
Brace Jovanovich, 1982); Fowler, Mark S., Albert Halprin, and James D.  
Schlichting, "Back to the Future: A Model of Telecommunications," Federal  
Communications Law Journal 38(2), August 1986.

[20] Federal Communications Commission. Report No. CC 96-10. Public Notice  
No. 2124: Common Carrier Bureau Clarifies and Extends Request for Comment on  
ACTA Petition Relating to "Internet Phone" Software and Hardware (RM No.  
8775), March 1996, _http://www.fcc.org/_.

[21] Barmann, T., "Internet's 'free' Calling Irks Telephone Companies,"  
Providence Journal Bulletin, 15 March 1996, p. 1F; Kramer, A., "Internet  
Calling Bypasses Old Phone Routes," Atlanta Journal and Constitution Daily  
On-line Guide, Cyberscene, 16 March 1996; "ACTA Coalition Attempts to Make  
Its Competition Illegal," NorthStar Newsletter, No. 13, 17 March 1996.

[22] _http://www.fcc.gov/telecom.html_; refer also to  
_http://www.technologylaw.com/techlaw/act.html_.

[23] The FCC was originally mandated under the 1934 Communications Act to  
provide universal service: the ability for individuals to purchase basic  
telephone services at a fair and reasonable rate regardless of geography.  
Extending basic telephone service to the general population was considered a  
public good that displayed positive externalities. See reference National  
Science Foundation (1996) for citations.

[24] Hapgood 1995, p. 140.

[25] Anderson, Robert H., Tora K. Bikson, Sally Ann Law, and Bridger M.  
Mitchell, "Universal Access to E-Mail: Feasibility and Societal  
Implications," Center for Information Revolution Analyses, Rand, 1995,  
_http://www.rand.org/publications/MR/MR650/_.
