          May 21, 1999          
          U.S. Outlines How Makers of Vitamins 
          Fixed Global Prices 

          By STEPHEN LABATON and DAVID BARBOZA         

          [W] ASHINGTON -- Every year around             
              August or September, the senior          f
          executives from the world's largest          
          producers of vitamins would gather          r
          clandestinely for a few days at a
          European hotel or an executive's home
          for what some called the "top-notch
          meeting" and others the "summit            
          conference" to plan "the budget for
          Vitamin Inc.," Federal prosecutors
          said Thursday.

          They said the meetings set production
          quotas, prices and distribution for
          vitamin ingredients that were used to
          enrich products in every refrigerator
          and kitchen cabinet in America, from
          morning supplemental pills to enriched
          milk and orange juice, fortified
          breakfast cereals, breads, butters and
          meats. The global market for such
          vitamins as A, B2 (riboflavin), B5, C,
          E and Beta Carotene would be divided
          among the participants to the
          half-percentage point.

          A few months later, according to the
          prosecutors, the budget would be
          reviewed by midlevel executives to
          make sure everything was working as
          planned, or it would be adjusted to
          reflect corporate profits and
          worldwide demand.

          Attorney General Janet Reno and her
          aides described in detail Thursday a
          decade-long vitamin cartel that they
          said had been shattered in one of the
          largest criminal prosecutions ever
          made by the Justice Department. In a
          Federal court in Dallas,
          Hoffmann-LaRoche Ltd., the Swiss
          pharmaceutical giant, pleaded guilty
          to one criminal count of violating the
          Sherman Antitrust Act and agreed to
          pay a $500 million penalty, the
          largest criminal fine ever imposed by
          the Justice Department.

          Announcing a management shake-up today
          that included the departure of top
          officials in its vitamins division,
          Roche Holding A.G., the parent
          company, said that it anticipated
          "substantial further fines" in Europe
          and Canada. It may also face
          potentially crushing damages in
          class-action lawsuits that have been
          filed by consumers and companies that
          bought or used vitamins.

          A second company, BASF A.G. of
          Germany, has agreed to pay a $225
          million fine for its role in the
          conspiracy. A dozen smaller companies
          are still being investigated.

          At a news conference here to announce
          the initial results of the
          investigation, Attorney General Reno
          and other senior officials described a
          global conspiracy to fix vitamin
          prices. They said one Swiss executive
          had agreed to return to the United
          States to serve a jail sentence,
          although he was not the
          highest-ranking official involved in
          the scheme. At least seven other
          executives remained under
          investigation.

          "On a daily basis for the past 10
          years, every American consumer paid to
          eat and drink or use a product whose
          price was artificially inflated," Ms.
          Reno said. "Day by day, consumers took
          a hit in their wallet so that these
          co-conspirators could reap hundreds of
          millions of dollars in additional
          revenue."

          Joel I. Klein, the Assistant Attorney
          General in charge of the antitrust
          division, said the conspiracy affected
          more than $5 billion of commerce "in
          products found in every American
          household." He did not provide
          specifics on how the prices of
          individual products were affected.

          Justice Department officials said the
          director of worldwide marketing for
          the vitamins division of Hoffmann-La
          Roche had agreed to travel from his
          home in Switzerland to the United
          States to plead guilty to antitrust
          and cover-up charges, pay a $100,000
          fine and serve a four-month prison
          term.

          Investigators were said to have been
          particularly angry at the executive,
          Kuno Sommer, because he had lied about
          the existence of the vitamin cartel
          and his role following Roche's guilty
          plea in another price-fixing case two
          years ago. In that case, involving
          citric acid, Roche paid a $14 million
          fine and promised to cooperate with
          investigators.

          Dr. Sommer, who had previously lived
          in New Jersey when he served as North
          American regional manager for Roche,
          denied in a 1997 interview with
          investigators that there was a vitamin
          cartel and said he was not aware of
          any meetings or conversations
          involving price-fixing in that market,
          according to court papers filed by the
          Government Thursday that are part of
          his plea agreement. In fact, at that
          time he was still playing an important
          role in setting vitamin prices and
          allocating market share, according to
          a plea agreement filed on his behalf
          Thursday in Federal court in Dallas.

          While Justice Department officials
          said Dr. Sommer was not the
          highest-level executive who knew about
          the conspiracy and cover-up, they did
          not say who might be prosecuted next.
          Among the executives who did not
          receive immunity in the deal reached
          with Roche were Roland Brönnimann,
          president of the Vitamins and Fine
          Chemicals division, and Andreas Hauri,
          a former executive vice president and
          head of global marketing.

          Martin D. Hirsch, a Roche spokesman,
          said that both Dr. Sommer and
          Brönnimann had left the company and
          that it would take a one-time charge
          against its earnings to pay for the
          Justice Department case.

          "We're redoubling our existing efforts
          to insure that people at all levels of
          our organization receive training on
          proper business policies," Hirsch
          said. "We want to make it clear that
          any improper practices will not be
          condoned by the company."

          The turning point in the long
          investigation came three months ago,
          when Rhône-Poulenc of France, one of
          the members of the cartel, came
          forward with crucial evidence in order
          to avoid prosecution. Lawyers said
          Rhône had decided to cooperate in
          large part because of a pending $22
          billion merger with Hoechst A.G.,
          which cannot be completed without the
          approval of antitrust officials in the
          United States and Europe.

          Gary R. Spratling, head of the
          antitrust division's criminal section,
          said top executives had treated the
          industry as one great big company that
          they called "Vitamin Inc." Spratling
          said the executives "took great pains
          to conceal the activity," issuing
          instructions to destroy all records
          and notes of their meetings or face
          possible termination if anyone found
          out.

          "Simply put, the vitamin cartel was as
          bad as they get," said Spratling, an
          official in the antitrust division for
          28 years. "Nothing was left to chance
          -- or, more accurately, to
          competition."

          Spratling said Federal sentencing
          guidelines gave the Government the
          discretion to seek fines as large as
          $1.3 billion against Roche and $300
          million against BASF. But prosecutors
          decided on the lower figures as part
          of the deal reached with the
          companies.

          The fine imposed Thursday on Roche
          dwarfed the previous record cases. The
          largest total fine collected by the
          Justice Department before Thursday had
          been $340 million paid by Daiwa Bank
          in 1996 for fraud and a cover-up in a
          large securities fraud case. And the
          largest previous fines imposed by the
          antitrust division occurred earlier
          this year, when SGL Carbon agreed to
          pay $135 million and UCAR
          International $110 million for their
          role in a cartel that had controlled
          the market for graphite electrodes.

          As a result, with more than four
          months remaining in its fiscal year,
          the Justice Department's antitrust
          division has already collected $913
          million, substantially more money than
          the total amount collected in its
          entire history.

          The vitamin cartel case grew out of a
          smaller investigation into
          price-fixing in the additives market
          that involved some of the same
          companies at the heart of Thursday's
          inquiry. That investigation ultimately
          led to a $100 million fine imposed on
          Archer Daniels Midland in 1997.

-----------------------------------------------------------
Here is some more information from the WSJ (5/21/99)

The two firms being fined are Hoffman-Laroche, a Swiss firm and BASF, a  
German firm. A third firm that participated in the cartel was Rhone Poulenc,  
a French company. Rhone Poulenc weren't fined now because they began  
"cooperating with federal investigators" a few months ago under an amnesty  
program and helped make the case against their co-conspirators. Together the  
three firms accounted for  75% of the market. Hoffman Laroche has a market  
share of 40%, BASF 20%, and Rhone Poulenc 15%.   The total amount of the fine
assessed was  725 million dollars. Roche has annual revenues from vitamin  
sales of about 2.5 billion dollars.
 
Notice that these fines are being imposed by the U.S. department of justice  
on European companies for their actions in the U.S. market.  The WSJ story  
reports that "talks with the European antitrust authorities may take some  
time to progress".
 
In an interview, Roche's CEO, Franz B. Humer said "I am personally,  
absolutely shocked at what has happened."  
 

