          January 20, 1998

          America's New Drink? Water -- Just Water

          --------------------------------------------------------

          By CONSTANCE L. HAYS

          [A] bottle of water instead of a Coke? It sounds
              downright un-American.

          But that's what Bonnie Netjes chooses all the time. "I
          am not a pop drinker," declared Ms. Netjes, a
          clothing-store owner from Rock Rapids, Iowa, who has
          also pretty much given up coffee. "I just decided to
          drink more water a few years ago. I go for the cheapest
          kind because I can't tell there's a difference in
          taste."

          And there are millions like her. Over the last year or
          so, bottled water has come into its own as an emerging
          alternative to soft drinks, complete with national
          distribution, heavy-duty marketing and even a price war.

          This is water, just water -- no sparkle, no fizz, no
          flavoring, and no guarantee that it's greatly different
          from what comes out of your tap.

          While this business used to be the province of small
          companies with regional followings, now some big
          corporate hitters -- including at least one soft-drink
          giant -- are getting into the game.

          No wonder, for sales are booming. Sales of large bottles
          -- the kind that feed water coolers -- have grown
          respectably. But it is the smaller bottles -- whether
          the single-serving size, for washing down a hot dog, or
          the 1.5-liter models, found on desks or in gym bags --
          that have really taken off.

          Sales of domestic water in small bottles exploded from
          4.4 million gallons in 1984 to 750 million last year. By
          contrast, the overall market, including bulk sales, has
          grown from 843 million gallons to 2.95 billion, which is
          still dwarfed by the 14.6 billion gallons of carbonated
          soft drinks sold.

          "It's still small, but it's very much on the radar
          screen," said Michael Bellas, chairman and chief
          executive of Beverage Marketing, whose database on what
          people drink is a kind of Rosetta stone for the
          industry.

          Health trends and pollution concerns have always driven
          sales, and both of those have broadened in the years
          since bottled water first appeared in the United States.
          The use of filters like Brita has also grown, reflecting
          concern about just what is passing through a household's
          pipes.

          But there is more to the story. Clearly, bottled water
          has evolved from its elitist beginnings -- when people
          could be overheard debating the relative merits of
          various European waters -- into a product that is
          decidedly more mainstream.

          Witness Pepsi-Cola's Aqua Fina, which is basically
          purified tap water drawn at 11 of its bottling plants.
          It has been distributed nationally since fall. Great
          Brands of Europe, a unit of Danone Group, is pushing
          Dannon water, a spring water that has been in national
          distribution for a year, and is intended as a
          family-oriented alternative to its pricier Evian brand.

          Crystal Geyser sells spring water from a pair of sources
          -- one in California, the other in Tennessee. And a year
          ago, Coca-Cola Enterprises, which includes most domestic
          Coke bottlers, made an unsuccessful bid to buy Naya, a
          spring-water brand based in Quebec.

          Wall Street is also getting washed by the wave:
          AquaPenn, a Pennsylvania spring-water company with
          national distribution, plans a public stock offering,
          the first by a water company in recent memory. And the
          evidence of water's omnipresence can be found
          everywhere: Even New York City hot-dog vendors now sell
          bottles of Poland Spring, a unit of Nestle, along with
          standbys like Coke and Snapple.

          "Historically, the industry has felt that spring water
          was a higher priority, but you can't build a national
          brand like that," Bellas said. "The game is going to go
          to the low-cost producer that's regionally diversified,
          and the one that can put some marketing muscle behind
          these waters."

          It was only in 1984 that smaller bottles first appeared
          on store shelves, when wine coolers were all the rage.
          While wine coolers are all but extinct, sales of
          nonsparkling, or "still," water in small bottles grew 30
          percent last year, compared with about 3 percent for
          carbonated soft drinks, according to Beverage Marketing.

          In fact, the small bottles have had double-digit sales
          growth every year since 1984 -- except for a dip in
          1991, the year after Perrier was found to contain traces
          of benzene along with its bubbles.

          Much of the gain has come since 1992, when half-liter
          bottles -- which can fit into vending machines, lunch
          boxes and minibars -- became the package of choice.
          Profit margins are also higher on those bottles.

          The growth has come mainly at the expense of diet soda.
          "There's been a lack of excitement in the diet-soda
          category for years now, with people concerned about what
          they are putting into their bodies," Bellas said. "Water
          has nothing. No guilt."

          With so many new entrants, "the bottled water industry
          is highly competitive," notes the prospectus for
          AquaPenn's planned offering.

          Being big, and having a distribution system, seem to be
          the keys. Some companies, like Great Brands of Europe,
          which owns Evian, Dannon and Volvic, and the Perrier
          Group, a unit of Nestle SA, have acquired a string of
          regional waters. Pepsi, a unit of Pepsico, is so far the
          only company marketing tap water, said Jennifer Levine,
          a spokeswoman for the International Bottled Water
          Association.

          What about quality? Water sources must be licensed and
          monitored regularly by federal inspectors. There are
          both federal guidelines and stricter ones adopted by the
          International Bottled Water Association, all adopted
          within the last six years, Ms. Levine said.

          She traces the burst of water sales to increased use of
          polyurethane soft-drink bottles, which are ideal for
          water since they impart no plastic taste, and to the
          nutritional-content labels required since 1993 on most
          foods and beverages, which revealed to consumers just
          what they were drinking.

          "The more people realize what's in some of these drinks,
          the more they turn to water for what it doesn't have --
          sugar, Nutrasweet, caffeine," she said.

          Selling water on a national scale has prompted companies
          to stake out different niches. Naya, sold only in
          bottles of 1.5 liters or less, is aimed at the under-30
          male with extreme-sports commercials. The company spent
          $6 million on advertising last year, up from $500,000 in
          1995, said Steve Wassek, vice president and general
          manager for its distributor, Nora Beverages USA, whose
          parent company is based in Montreal. Naya has also tried
          to win loyalty from gay and lesbian consumers, he added.

          "We looked at Evian, and they'd gone country club," he
          said. "The different directions we've taken say a lot
          about the category growth and how it's become a much
          more mass-market product."

          Evian begs to differ. "That's not a fair
          characterization, based on our ubiquitous availability,"
          said Michael Neuwirth, a spokesman for Great Brands of
          Europe, based in Stamford, Conn. Still, since Evian is
          imported from a spring in the French Alps, the company
          clearly saw a need for something more middle America.
          Thus began Dannon Natural Spring Water, which comes from
          two springs: one in Henefer, Utah; one in the Laurentian
          Mountains, in Quebec.

          "We have focused on building awareness of the brand
          among families, and have developed partnerships with the
          national PTA and the American Youth Soccer
          Organization," Neuwirth said. "It's a family-focused
          brand, because of the pricing." Dannon water typically
          sells for 69 to 79 cents for a 1.5-liter bottle, he
          said, compared with $1.59 for Evian.

          So far, there has not been the kind of frenzied,
          taste-test-driven advertising of the cola battles, said
          Jane Lazgin, a spokeswoman for the Perrier Group, which
          includes 14 brands but has no truly national brand
          except its sparkling water. "Relatively speaking," she
          said, "bottled water is still in its infancy. We're not
          here to confuse the consumer, who in many ways is new to
          the market."

          The consumer is probably already confused, though.
          Crystal Geyser Alpine Spring water, for example, does
          not come from the Alps. It comes from springs in
          California and Tennessee. "Alpine is a description,"
          said John Stallcup, vice president for marketing at
          Crystal Geyser, which is based in San Francisco. "It
          means high mountains."

          The expanding market has produced its own price war,
          with prices falling from about $1.09 for a 1.5-liter
          bottle to as low as 69 cents, Bellas said.

          For soft-drink producers like Pepsi, the decision to
          sell water might seem a little odd. Profit margins are
          much narrower than in soft drinks, and Pepsi is alone
          among the top three soft-drink companies in creating a
          bottled water for the U.S. market.

          Larry Jabbonsky, a Pepsi spokesman, said Pepsi saw water
          as one more drink to serve to its customers. "We clearly
          want to play in any growing nonalcoholic beverage
          category," he said, noting the generally fragmented
          nature of the water business, which Pepsi gingerly
          tested in 1995 and took full scale across the country in
          late 1996.

          He would not disclose how much water Pepsi has sold, but
          industry analysts say it is a tiny fraction of
          soft-drink sales. Still, the company, which has traded
          on the un-European, low-budget aspects of its brand,
          seems pumped up. "In Wichita, as we speak, it's the No.
          1 bottled water," Jabbonsky said, adding that sales had
          also been strong in gas stations and convenience stores.
          "Based on what they tell us, Aqua Fina consumers
          couldn't care less about whether it's derived from a
          source or a spring."

          Meanwhile, Coca-Cola and Cadbury Schwepps, which makes
          7-Up, Dr Pepper and other soft drinks, have so far
          stayed away, which may heighten the appeal for Pepsi.
          Coke does sell a bottled water, Bon Aqua, in about 30
          countries overseas, but has no brand available
          domestically.

          Many Coca-Cola bottlers, who see a strong market for
          water, now carry Naya or Evian. "Each and every year our
          volume grows," said J. Bruce Llewellyn, the chairman and
          chief executive of Philadelphia Coca-Cola Bottling Co.,
          which sells a lot of Evian. "Water quality in the U.S.
          is getting progressively worse. Every time there's a
          water main break on 23rd Street and people have to boil
          water for a week, or there's problems with the Ohio
          River, it clears out the supermarket shelves."

          The presence of giants like Pepsi in the bottled-water
          market may create problems for some of the other brands
          that are distributed by Coke and Pepsi bottlers. History
          has shown those companies to be forceful about
          eliminating products that compete with their own.

          And that competition is alive and well. "I don't like
          the dyes, the coloring," said Trevor Watson, a
          44-year-old vinyl salesman in Manhattan who tends to
          pick bottled water over other soft drinks. "If I can't
          get water, I will drink soda. But I will drink half,
          that's it."


                Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
