Business Week

March 14, 1994

HEADLINE: WHAT PRICE AIR?

BYLINE: Mark Lewyn in Washington

HIGHLIGHT: The FCC readies an airwave auction by boning up on game theory

Australian bureaucrats thought they had struck it rich last April when they
auctioned off rights to use the airwaves for a satellite-TV service. An
investment group called Ucom Proprietary Ltd. submitted a sealed bid for $ 152
million, far above government projections. The problem was that Ucom had no
intention of spending that much. It deliberately defaulted on its winning bid,
forcing the government to turn to the next lower bid -- which was also Ucom's.
The company proceeded to default on one bid after another before finally
sticking with one that was just slightly higher than the bid of its closest
rival, which by then had leaked out. Ucom walked off with the license for $ 84
million -- setting off an uproar that nearly cost Australia's communications
minister his job.

The U.S. Federal Communications Commission is determined not to make such a
mistake later this year when it hands out licenses for new wireless phone
systems known as Personal Communications Services (PCS). In the past, the
agency awarded licenses free of charge, either through lotteries or hearings.
This time around, it intends to hold its first-ever auction. To make sure the
sale goes smoothly, the FCC has enlisted the help of an expert in game theory,
John McMillan, an economist at the University of California at San Diego. His
job is to apply the principles of game theory -- a branch of applied
mathematics that studies how people try to outsmart one another in contests
ranging from checkers to politics -- to help the FCC get the most for its
licenses.

Not to be outdone, potential bidders have signed up their own game theorists.
Pacific Bell has hired Stanford University Professors Robert B. Wilson and Paul
R. Milgrom. Bell Atlantic Corp. has engaged Yale University Professor Barry J.
Nalebuff and Stanford's Jeremy Bulow. MCI Communications Corp. has enlisted
University of Maryland economist Peter Cramton. The consultants have been
arguing in filings to the FCC over what the rules of the auction should be.
Once the agency decides on the rules -- which Congress has said it must do by
Mar. 8 -- the theorists will change gears, helping their clients devise bidding
strategies to exploit the system. If all goes as planned, which is by no means
assured, the Office of Management & Budget hopes the auctions will raise more
than $ 12 billion.

TRUE FUN. Game theory dates back to the 1940s, when mathematician John von
Neumann and economist Oskar Morgenstern turned their formidable analytic
abilities to playing their favorite game -- poker. Their goal was to understand
the best strategy to pursue -- bluff, fold, stand pat, or raise -- given a
particular hand. Game theory was funded in the 1950s and 1960s by the Pentagon,
which was interested in the best strategies for avoiding -- and fighting -- a
nuclear war. But it has generally been shunned by business because the real
world may be too complex and fickle to structure and analyze in any meaningful
way. An auction, with rules known by all parties, is an exception, however.
"This is one of the biggest applications of game theory in a long time," says
University of Texas economist R. Preston McAfee, who is advising Airtouch
Communications, the wireless business that is being spun off by Pacific Telesis
Group. The bidders' game theorists are having a rollicking good time devising
strategies that will play to their clients' strengths -- and minimize their
weaknesses. Before its Feb. 28 announcement that it would take a 17% stake in
Nextel Communications Inc., which has wireless franchises across the nation,
MCI had lobbied the FCC to award a PCS license that covered the entire country.
MCI figured that most other big telecom companies would be disqualified from
bidding for such a broad license on the grounds that they already own
substantial cellular properties. Furthermore, MCI proposed that the bid be
awarded through a Vickrey auction, a sealed-bid procedure in which the high
bidder wins but only pays the price of the second-highest bid (table, page 48).
MCI calculated that with the pool of bidders small, the second-highest bid
would probably be low. "It was so ridiculously self-serving, it wasn't funny,"
says Yale's Nalebuff. MCI later dropped the idea.

The FCC sees right through such proposals, which would limit the government's
take. The agency does plan to assist small businesses, women, and minorities by
setting aside some licenses on which only they will be allowed to bid -- and by
letting them pay in installments. But big businesses won't get any price break,
though they complain that they'll have to spend so much for licenses that they
won't have anything left to build their systems. Kent Y. Nakamura, an FCC
attorney, argues that even if the government did devise an auction that left
more money in the pockets of bidders, there's no assurance that they would
invest it in wireless infrastructure instead of, say, executive bonuses.

To maximize the take, the agency will most likely go with a standard English
auction in which the winner pays what it bids -- and everyone can see all bids
as they are being made, either electronically or in person. Game-theory
research has shown that open auctions tend to stimulate bidding because the
contenders don't worry as much about the "winner's curse" of overpaying: Sealed
bids foster restraint for fear of needlessly making an offer that's way above
the second-highest bid.

"GARBAGE BIDS"? The FCC also wants to get PCS to the public as rapidly as
possible, however, which raises another issue: Should it take bids for all
2,500 or so airwave licenses at once? The agency intends to sell two licenses
apiece in each of 51 regions called "major trading areas" and five licenses
apiece in each of 492 smaller "basic trading areas." One camp of game theorists
argues that all licenses should be put up for bid simultaneously. That would
make it easier for buyers to assemble licenses into economically efficient
blocs of adjoining areas. This method appeals to the FCC, because if bidders
get what they need at the auction they won't waste time trading licenses
afterward, and wireless services would reach market more quickly. Trouble is,
requiring buyers to submit all their bids at once could be a nightmare of
complexity. And the more complicated the auction is, the greater the threat of
legal challenges from losing bidders - a major concern of the FCC. Beyond that,
the rules would probably have to allow contenders to withdraw and shift around
offers -- so a bidder who lost New York wouldn't be stuck with paying a high
price for a contiguous New Jersey property that it no longer wanted. But if
offers can be withdrawn, "people can submit all sorts of garbage bids," says
Northwestern University economist Daniel R. Vincent, who is advising
Washington-based American Personal Communications Inc., a company backed by
Washington Post Co. Without serious bids as a guide to value, buyers tend to be
cautious -- and come in low.

BIG UNKNOWNS. Of course, the alternative isn't entirely palatable, either. In a
sequential auction, using either sealed bids or open ones, licenses are put up
one at a time, like paintings. Because buyers can't go after geographic blocs
all at once, they may not bid as much for properties. "The problem with
sequential is that it doesn't allow bidders to fully express what they might be
willing to pay," says the FCC's Nakamura. Bell Atlantic wants a sequential
auction because it is less complex and less subject to legal challenge. But
Airtouch Communications, the Pacific Telesis spin-off, doesn't like this idea
because such an auction might drag on and on, wasting everyone's time. If the
auction is sequential, Nynex Corp. is hoping that properties won't be auctioned
off from biggest to smallest -- because it doesn't want New York to go first.
Game theory suggests that Nynex might be able to save money by calibrating a
bid for New York from the winning bids for other areas.

Academics have devoted entire careers to exploring just such questions. As the
Mar. 8 deadline approached, the FCC still had to make major decisions,
including whether to choose simultaneous bidding, sequential bidding, or some
hybrid. "There is no obvious best way," says Yale's Nalebuff. One thing is
clear, though: No matter what rules prevail, the government is bound to do
better than it has in the past. Since the dawn of broadcasting, the FCC has
been making gifts of licenses. It doesn't take a game theorist to point out
that any winnings are better than none.
