The Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition November 3, 1997

			Airlines Rely on Technology To Manipulate Fare
			Structure

			By SCOTT MCCARTNEY Staff Reporter of THE WALL
			STREET JOURNAL

			The gap in the air has never been wider.

While airlines continue to woo leisure travelers with sales, they are
squeezing business travelers like never before. Discounts on
unrestricted fares have become as rare as in-flight dinners, and with
business fares already up by 20% this year, carriers pushed through an
additional 5% across-the-board increase in September. In contrast,
prices for leisure tickets have actually fallen slightly, according to
American Express Travel Services.  "They've got you and they know it,"
grumbles construction executive Tony Konosky, who recently wasted a
week trying to find a ticket from Houston to Bombay, India, for less
than $2,500. "It's like there's a target on your chest."

Mr. Konosky isn't far off, given the advanced technology that carriers
now have at their disposal to set and manipulate fares. Computers allow
airlines to constantly tell each other about fare changes, tamping down
the chances that any one will gain even a momentary price advantage.
And an obscure mathematical science known as "yield management"
empowers airlines to project almost precisely how many last-minute
business travelers will show up willing to pay whatever it takes to get
on a given flight.

Cheap Seats

Such tactical tools have transformed airline economics during the past
year. Fare sales once were few and fleeting when traffic was strong and
fares were high, as has been the case this year. But with a firmer
handle on the demand for high-fare business tickets, carriers have run
almost continuous leisure sales and significantly expanded the supply
of cheap, advance-fare seats.

For business travelers, that has meant packed planes as well as high
fares. Load factors -- the percentage of seats filled -- have run at
record levels, more than 70%, and many popular flights are completely
filled all the time. "Ten years ago I would have said to you we
probably couldn't get load factors as high as they've been in 1997,"
says Robert Crandall, chairman and chief executive of American Airlines
and its parent AMR Corp.  This fall, American will begin phasing in a
new, even more powerful yield-management system that is expected to
boost its annual revenue by as much as $200 million.  With surprisingly
high traffic and fares in September, airlines are posting record
third-quarter earnings. Unit revenues are at all-time highs, and 1997
will mark the third-consecutive year of record profits for the airline
industry, a milestone reached only twice before in its regulated days.
What's more, an expected record 1998 will mark the first time in
aviation history of four-consecutive record years of profits.

			Fewer Attacks

			Airlines also have benefited from a strong
			economy, limited capacity increases and muted
			competition, particularly among low-fare
			start-ups. But many executives say airlines
			have simply learned to more effectively price
			their product, instead of attacking each other
			to gain market share.

			Major carriers have grown reluctant to undercut
			each others' fares, knowing retaliation can be
			expensive.  Besides, airlines have found that
			business travelers are more swayed by
			convenient schedules and frequent-flier
			programs than by price. Because of such
			factors, and heavy demand, carriers have
			readily endorsed each others' business-fare
			increases rather than trying to undermine them.
			"We've evolved from one of these cataclysmic,
			World War III industries to some equilibrium
			that's good for shareholders and employees and
			communities," says Gordon Bethune, Continental
			Airlines' chairman and chief executive.

			Much of that pricing mastery has come from
			recent advances in yield management, which
			began as simple overbooking of flights. Before
			deregulation in 1978, all carriers offered the
			same government-set fares; discounts were rare
			beyond night or weekend flights.  People
			Express introduced low fares nationwide in the
			early 1980s; old-line carriers, with higher
			costs, couldn't match without losing millions.

			Bell's Formula

			In response, Mr. Crandall developed the first
			true yield-management system. It allowed
			American to offer a limited number of seats on
			a plane at a People Express price, while still
			selling high-fare tickets to business
			travelers.

			Those early systems, however, lacked the
			computing muscle to track booking trends or to
			gauge the systemwide impact of seat-filling
			discounts offered on an individual route.
			Inevitably, carriers either sold too many cheap
			seats and left behind big-ticket customers, or
			held back too many business seats and flew
			sparsely filled airplanes.

			But in 1988, Bell Laboratories patented a
			mathematical formula that could perform rapid
			calculations on fare problems with thousands of
			variables. That led to further advances in
			software, enabling yield-management gurus to
			use simple business computers to perform
			complicated fare-crunching and seat-allocating
			that even a Cray supercomputer couldn't handle
			just a few years before. By meshing massive
			historical databases on ridership with
			up-to-the-minute bookings, carriers could
			predict with almost pinpoint accuracy how many
			business customers would want seats on a
			particular flight. As a result, "high fares get
			higher and low fares get lower," says Robert
			Cross, whose Aeronomics Inc. sells
			yield-management systems to airlines.

			Indeed, the resulting price spread can be
			staggering.  Take Flight 2015, American's
			popular 5:30 p.m. departure from Chicago to
			Phoenix. Its 125 coach seats are divided among
			seven fare "buckets," with round-trip tickets
			ranging from $238 to $1,404. In the weeks
			before each Chicago-Phoenix flight, American's
			yield-management computers constantly adjust
			the number of seats available in each bucket,
			taking into account tickets sold, historical
			ridership patterns and connecting passengers
			likely to use the route as one leg of a longer
			trip.

			If advance bookings are slim, American adds
			seats to low-fare buckets. If business
			customers buy unrestricted fares earlier than
			expected, the yield-management computer takes
			seats out of the discount buckets and preserves
			them for last-minute bookings that the database
			predicts will still show up.

			With 69 of 125 coach seats already sold four
			weeks before one recent departure of Flight
			2015, American's computer began to limit the
			number of seats in lower-priced buckets. A week
			later, it totally shut off sales for the bottom
			three buckets, priced $300 or less.  To a
			Chicago customer looking for a cheap seat, the
			flight was "sold out," although
			advance-purchase fares were still available to
			New York-to-Phoenix customers connecting in
			Chicago, because the overall fare structure for
			that one-stop trip was higher and because
			American had lots of seats available on the
			connecting New York-Chicago flights.

			One day before departure, with 130 passengers
			booked for the 125-seat flight, American still
			offered five seats at full fare because its
			computer database indicated 10 passengers were
			likely not to show up or take other flights.
			Flight 2015 departed full and no one was
			bumped.

			Scalping Complaint

			While carriers boast that yield management
			allows them to extend leisure discounts to more
			travelers and reserve seats for their best
			customers, critics contend that it amounts to
			high-tech scalping. "Yield management is good
			for airlines, but it certainly isn't good for
			travelers," says Nancy Barrows, chief operating
			officer of Woodside Travel Trust, a major
			corporate-travel agency. "It's pushed business
			fares artificially high."

			The effects are most striking in airline hub
			cities, where one carrier can dictate pricing.
			In Denver, where UAL Corp.'s United Airlines is
			king, business fares are up 24% this year --
			and leisure fares are down 51%. In Dallas,
			where American dominates, business fares are up
			26%, while leisure fares are down 20%,
			according to American Express.

			Philadelphia-to-Houston has one of the highest
			average fares of any U.S. route of under 1,500
			miles. Business fares there are up 18% this
			year, according to Topaz Enterprises Inc., a
			Portland, Ore., airfare-auditing firm, even
			though US Airways Group has added two nonstop
			flights to compete with rival Continental,
			which dominates with 66% of the market.

			Tanker-ship manager Kevin Coyne's company
			recently paid Continental $1,484 for a one-day
			round trip to Houston.  In contrast,
			Philadelphia-based chemical executive Dan Smith
			drove 90 minutes and made the same trip from
			Baltimore, where Continental competes with
			low-fare Southwest Airlines. "It makes no sense
			to me," says Mr.  Smith, who paid Continental a
			mere $280.

			Competitive pressures aren't likely to drive
			business fares down, thanks to Airline Tariff
			Publishing Co.  Located in a black-glass
			building at Washington, D.C.'s Dulles Airport,
			ATPCO is owned by a group of 24 international
			airlines, including the seven largest U.S.
			carriers.

			World-Wide Posting

			Every carrier sends its fare changes to ATPCO,
			whose centralized computer system sends a
			download seven times a day to
			computer-reservation systems used by travel
			agents -- and to the airlines themselves. The
			system was started by the industry's lobbying
			group, the Air Transport Association, before
			deregulation. Airlines contend it still is
			necessary to make sure fares are posted
			world-wide simultaneously and correctly.

			ATPCO says its two mainframe computers create a
			perfect marketplace, akin to a gas-station
			owner being able to watch prices his competitor
			posts across the street.  "The reason for our
			being is to allow carriers to as easily as
			possible manage their fares and get them into
			the marketplace," says Michael Ferrier, ATPCO's
			president.

			Indeed, ATPCO insures that no pricing change
			goes undetected. Some airlines' internal
			computers suggest responses to ATPCO-announced
			fare changes, based on the competitors' market
			share and other factors. A few carriers even
			allow their computers to automatically change
			fares, though most require a human to sign
			off.

			At Houston-based Continental, pricing experts
			meet three times daily to review ATPCO-reported
			fare changes, especially those involving
			Continental's major business routes. Within
			minutes, a Continental response can be on its
			way back to ATPCO with a simple keystroke or
			one-page fax. "We tend to always match," fare
			changes, says James Compton, Continental's head
			of pricing.

			Consumer advocates argue that ATPCO lessens
			pressure to lower prices because it removes
			competitive fears. In a 1992 crackdown, the
			Justice Department did bar airlines from using
			ATPCO to post, or "signal," proposed fare
			changes and then withdraw them if competitors
			didn't go along. Now, a fare change must be
			available as soon as it goes into the central
			computer.

			Weekend Boosts

			In practice, however, carriers often initiate
			fare boosts late in the week, then watch to see
			if competitors will match over the weekend,
			when travel agencies are closed and few
			business tickets are sold.  If that doesn't
			happen, increases typically are pulled Sunday
			night. "That is signaling," complains Alexander
			Anolik, a travel lawyer who represents airlines
			and travel agencies. "It's better than it used
			to be for the consumer, but it's still
			signaling."

			During the first weekend in September, several
			airlines raised business fares 5%. That Sunday
			night, however, United instructed ATPCO to roll
			back the increase in markets where it competes
			with Southwest Airlines, which hadn't matched
			the increase. When ATPCO mistakenly rolled back
			the increase in all United markets, major
			carriers like American immediately followed
			suit. Early Monday morning, United reinstituted
			the 5% increase in its non-Southwest markets.
			Within 24 hours, other major carriers had done
			the same.

			"It certainly looks like they have a way of
			getting everybody to do the same thing," says
			Pitts Carr, an Atlanta attorney who sued
			carriers for anticompetitive pricing practices
			in 1992. (He negotiated a settlement with the
			airlines.)

			Justice Department officials say the system is
			legal as long as fares are immediately for
			sale, noting that, even over a weekend, a
			carrier takes a risk leading a fare increase
			because competitors will be priced lower.

			Thin Margins

			Airlines argue that if they were gouging
			customers and colluding on prices, they would
			be earning more money.  Despite the hefty
			earnings of the past three years, which are
			expected to total $13.9 billion by the end of
			1997, airline profit margins are still
			relatively skinny, and credit ratings for some
			major carriers remain below investment-grade.
			In the third quarter, American posted its
			highest pretax profit margin ever in its
			history, but it was only 10.1%. "We're just now
			approaching the average returns for most
			industries in this country," says Gerard Arpey,
			American's chief financial officer.

			Still, in an industry with a cutthroat
			reputation, some carriers seem downright shy
			about head-to-head competition. Trans World
			Airlines, for instance, has taken to offering
			discount coupons through Kroger Co.  grocery
			stores. And some travel agents have found that
			airlines will give them special deals, but only
			over the telephone and only if they think
			competitors won't find out. "As long as it
			doesn't provoke a response, they'll do it to
			keep my business," says Seattle travel agent
			Steve Danichek, who says he recently persuaded
			US Airways to knock $1,400 each off the price
			of some Seattle-to-Baltimore tickets.

			Such machinations are tough to stomach for
			salesman Gerald Davis. To save almost $1,000
			over the cost of a direct flight from Dallas,
			he recently went through Washington to get to
			New York. "They've made it a game that gets
			very irritating," he says. "I feel violated
			every time I get on a plane."

					 Return to top of page

			 Copyright  1997 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All
			 Rights
					       Reserved.
